# Page 1062

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1032
cricoid cartilage anteriorly and the inferior border of the C6 
vertebra posteriorly. The pharynx is widest (approximately 
5 cm) opposite the hyoid and narrowest (approximately 
1.5 cm) at its inferior end, where it is continuous with the 
esophagus. The ﬂ
 at posterior wall of the pharynx lies against 
the prevertebral layer of deep cervical fascia.
Interior of Pharynx. The pharynx is divided into three 
parts:
• Nasopharynx: posterior to the nose and superior to the 
soft palate.
• Oropharynx: posterior to the mouth.
• Laryngopharynx: posterior to the larynx.
The nasopharynx has a respiratory function; it is the poste-
rior extension of the nasal cavities (Figs. 8.41–8.43). The nose 
opens into the nasopharynx through two choanae (paired 
openings between the nasal cavity and the nasopharynx). The 
roof and posterior wall of the nasopharynx form a continuous 
surface that lies inferior to the body of the sphenoid bone and 
the basilar part of the occipital bone (Fig. 8.42).
the neck. Deviation of the trachea from the midline, appar-
ent superﬁ
 cially or radiographically, often signals the pres-
ence of a pathological process. Tracheal trauma often affects 
the closely adherent esophagus.
Alimentary Layer of Cervical Viscera
In the alimentary layer, cervical viscera take part in the 
digestive functions of the body. Although the pharynx con-
ducts air to the larynx, trachea, and lungs, the pharyngeal 
constrictors direct (and the epiglottis deﬂ
 ects) food to the 
esophagus. The esophagus, also involved in food propulsion, 
is the beginning of the alimentary canal (digestive tract).
PHARYNX
The pharynx is the superior expanded part of the alimen-
tary system posterior to the nasal and oral cavities, extending 
inferiorly past the larynx (Figs. 8.41 and 8.42). The pharynx 
extends from the cranial base to the inferior border of the 
Choana (posterior
nasal aperture)
Posterior view
Thyroid gland
Piriform fossa (recess)
Ary-epiglottic fold
Pharyngo-epiglottic fold
Terminal sulcus of tongue
Salpingopharyngeal fold
Pharyngeal recesses
Posterior lip of mouth
of pharyngotympanic
tube
Posterior one third of tongue
Nasopharynx
Oropharynx
Laryngopharynx
Esophagus
Pharyngo-esophageal junction
(narrowest part of esophagus)
Mucous membrane
covering cricoid cartilage
Inferior pharyngeal
constrictor (cut)
Interarytenoid notch
Laryngeal inlet (aditus)
Epiglottis
Middle pharyngeal constrictor (cut)
Nasal septum
Soft palate
Uvula
Superior pharyngeal constrictor (cut)
Foramen cecum
Body of sphenoid and basilar
part of occipital bone
Cranial base
FIGURE 8.42. Anterior wall of pharynx. In this dissection, the posterior wall has been incised along the midline and spread apart. Openings in the ante-
rior wall communicate with the nasal, oral, and laryngeal cavities. On each side of the laryngeal inlet, separated from it by the ary-epiglottic fold, a piriform 
fossa (recess) is formed by the invagination of the larynx into the anterior wall of the laryngopharynx.
