# Page 179

Chapter 1  •  Thorax
149
The sinu-atrial (SA) node is located anterolaterally 
just deep to the epicardium at the junction of the SVC and 
right atrium, near the superior end of the sulcus terminalis 
(Figs. 1.59A and 1.62A). The SA node—a small collection of 
nodal tissue, specialized cardiac muscle ﬁ
 bers, and associ-
ated ﬁ
 broelastic connective tissue—is the pacemaker of the 
heart. The SA node initiates and regulates the impulses for the 
contractions of the heart, giving off an impulse approximately 
70 times per minute in most people most of the time. The 
contraction signal from the SA node spreads myogenically 
(through the musculature) of both atria. The SA node is 
supplied by the sinu-atrial nodal artery, which usually 
arises as an atrial branch of the RCA (in 60% of people), 
but it often arises from the LCA (in 40%). The SA node 
is stimulated by the sympathetic division of the autonomic 
nervous system to accelerate the heart rate and is inhibited 
by the parasympathetic division to return to or approach its 
basal rate.
The atrioventricular (AV) node is a smaller collection 
of nodal tissue than the SA node. The AV node is located in 
the posteroinferior region of the interatrial septum near the 
opening of the coronary sinus (Figs. 1.59A–C and 1.62B). 
The signal generated by the SA node passes through the 
walls of the right atrium, propagated by the cardiac muscle 
(myogenic conduction), which transmits the signal rapidly 
from the SA node to the AV node. The AV node then distrib-
utes the signal to the ventricles through the AV bundle (Fig. 
1.62B). Sympathetic stimulation speeds up conduction, and 
para 
sympathetic stimulation slows it down. The AV bundle, 
the only bridge between the atrial and ventricular myocar-
dium, passes from the AV node through the ﬁ
 brous skeleton 
of the heart (see Fig. 1.51) and along the membranous part 
of the IVS.
At the junction of the membranous and muscular parts of the 
IVS, the AV bundle divides into right and left bundles (Fig. 
1.62B). These branches proceed on each side of the muscular IVS 
deep to the endocardium and then ramify into subendocardial 
branches (Purkinje ﬁ
 bers), which extend into the walls of the 
respective ventricles. The subendocardial branches of the right 
bundle stimulate the muscle of the IVS, the anterior papillary 
muscle through the septomarginal trabecula (moderator band), 
and the wall of the right ventricle. The left bundle divides near 
its origin into approximately six smaller tracts, which give rise to 
subendocardial branches that stimulate the IVS, the anterior and 
posterior papillary muscles, and the wall of the left ventricle.
The AV node is supplied by the AV nodal artery, the 
largest and usually the ﬁ
 rst IV septal branch of the posterior 
IV artery, a branch of the RCA in 80% of people (Fig. 1.59A–
C). Thus the arterial supply to both the SA and AV nodes is 
usually derived from the RCA. However, the AV bundle tra-
verses the center of the IVS, the anterior two thirds of which 
is supplied by the septal branches of the anterior IV branch 
of the LCA (Fig. 1.59C & D).
Impulse generation and conduction can be summarized 
as follows:
• The SA node initiates an impulse that is rapidly conducted 
to cardiac muscle ﬁ
 bers in the atria, causing them to con-
tract (Fig. 1.62A).
• The impulse spreads by myogenic conduction, which rap-
idly transmits the impulse from the SA node to the AV node.
• The signal is distributed from the AV node through the 
AV bundle and its branches (the right and left bundles), 
which pass on each side of the IVS to supply subendocar-
dial branches to the papillary muscles and the walls of the 
ventricles (Fig. 1.62B).
Superior
vena cava
Sinu-atrial 
(SA) node
Atrioventricular
(AV) node
Membranous
interatrial and
interventricular
septa
Atrioventricular
(AV) bundle
Right and left
bundles
Muscular
interventricular
septum (IVS)
Subendo-
cardial
branches
Anterior
papillary
muscle 
Septomarginal
trabecula 
(moderator band)
(A)
(B)
Wall of left
ventricle
Sulcus
(crista) 
terminalis
Anterosuperior views
Preferential
(physiological)
pathways
FIGURE 1.62. Conducting system of heart. A. Impulses (arrows) initiated at the SA node, located at the superior end of the sulcus (internally, crista) 
terminalis, are propagated through the atrial musculature to the AV node. B. Impulses (arrows) received by the AV node, in the inferior part of the inter 
atrial 
septum, are conducted through the AV bundle and its branches to the myocardium. The AV bundle begins at the AV node and divides into right and left 
bundles at the junction of the membranous and muscular parts of the IVS.
