# Page 1041

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1011
Internal Jugular Pulse
Although pulsations are most commonly associated 
with arteries, pulsations of the (IJV) can provide 
information about heart activity corresponding to 
electrocardiogram (ECG) recordings and right atrial pres-
sure. The IJV pulse is not palpable in the same manner as 
arterial pulses; however, the vein’s pulsations are transmitted 
through the surrounding tissue and may be observed beneath 
the SCM superior to the medial end of the clavicle.
Because there are no valves in the brachiocephalic vein or 
the superior vena cava, a wave of contraction passes up these 
vessels to the inferior bulb of the IJV. The pulsations are espe-
cially visible when the person’s head is inferior to the lower 
limbs (Trendelenburg position). The internal jugular pulse 
increases considerably in conditions such as mitral valve dis-
ease (see Chapter 1), which increases pressure in the pulmo-
nary circulation and right side of the heart. The right IJV runs a 
straighter, more direct course to the right atrium than does the 
left; thus it is the one that is examined (Swartz, 2009).
Internal Jugular Vein Puncture
A needle and catheter may be inserted into the IJV 
for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes. The right 
IJV is preferable because it is usually larger and 
straighter. During this procedure, the clinician palpates the 
common carotid artery and inserts the needle into the IJV 
just lateral to it at a 30° angle, aiming at the apex of the tri-
angle between the sternal and clavicular heads of the SCM, 
the lesser supraclavicular fossa (Fig. B8.4). The needle is 
then directed inferolaterally toward the ipsilateral nipple.
Sternocleidomastoid 
muscle
Superior vena cava
Internal jugular vein
Subclavian vein
FIGURE B8.4. Internal jugular vein puncture.
SUPERFICIAL STRUCTURES OF NECK: CERVICAL REGIONS
Sternocleidomastoid (SCM) and trapezius: The SCM and 
trapezius muscles share their origins from a common embryo-
logic source, innervation by the spinal accessory nerve (CN XI), 
enclosure by the investing layer of deep cervical fascia, a linear 
superior attachment to the cranial base, and an inferior attach-
ment to the pectoral girdle. ¨ Their superﬁ
 cial masses and 
palpable borders provide the basis for describing the regions 
of the neck. ¨ The SCM produces multiple movements of the 
head and neck. ¨ The trapezius causes multiple movements of 
the scapula, depending on whether the muscles act unilaterally 
or bilaterally, and independently or in conjunction with con-
centric or eccentric contraction of other muscles.
Lateral cervical region: The lateral cervical region is 
bounded by the SCM, trapezius, and middle third of the clavicle, 
with a muscular ﬂ
 oor formed by the lateral deep cervical muscles. 
¨ It is subdivided by the diagonally placed inferior belly of the 
omohyoid. ¨ Most apparent within the superior occipital triangle 
is the lower half of the external jugular vein. ¨ Most important 
clinically is the superﬁ
 cially located spinal accessory nerve (CN 
XI). ¨ In the inferior and much smaller omoclavicular triangle, the 
brachial plexus emerges between the middle and anterior scalene 
muscles, the latter of which is crossed anteriorly by the phrenic 
nerve. ¨ Superior to the brachial plexus, and in the same plane, 
is the cervical plexus. ¨ The cutaneous branches of this plexus 
emerge from the midpoint of the posterior border of the SCM 
and radiate toward the scalp, auricle, anterior neck, and shoulder.
Anterior cervical region: The anterior cervical region is 
inferior to the body of the mandible, extending anteriorly from 
the SCM to the midline. ¨ The bellies of the digastric, the ante-
rior belly of the omohyoid, and the hyoid subdivide the region 
into smaller triangles. ¨ The submental triangle is superﬁ
 cial 
to the ﬂ
 oor of the mouth. ¨ The submandibular triangle, supe-
rior to the digastric bellies, is occupied by the submandibular 
salivary gland and submandibular lymph nodes. ¨ The facial 
artery, coursing within this triangle, is palpable as it emerges 
from it and crosses the body of the mandible. ¨ The carotid 
triangle, between the posterior belly of the digastric, superior 
belly of the omohyoid, and SCM, includes much of the carotid 
sheath and related structures, including the bifurcation of the 
common carotid, the carotid sinus and body, and the initial 
branches of the external carotid artery. ¨ The muscular 
triangle is formed and occupied by the infrahyoid muscles.
The Bottom Line
