# Page 1102

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1072
The peripheral processes of the neurons extend to the 
maculae of the utricle and saccule (sensitive to linear 
acceleration and the pull of gravity relative to the posi-
tion of the head) and to the cristae of the ampullae of the 
semicircular ducts (sensitive to rotational acceleration).
• The cochlear nerve is composed of the central processes 
of bipolar neurons in the spiral ganglion; the peripheral 
processes of the neurons extend to the spiral organ for the 
sense of hearing.
Within the internal acoustic meatus, the two divisions of CN 
VIII are accompanied by the primary root and intermediate 
nerve of CN VII and the labyrinthine artery (see Chapter 7).
Somatic (Branchial) Motor
Motor ﬁ
 bers pass to one muscle, the stylopharyngeus, 
derived from the 3rd pharyngeal arch.
Visceral (Parasympathetic) Motor
Following a circuitous route initially involving the tympanic 
nerve, presynaptic parasympathetic ﬁ
 bers are provided 
to the otic ganglion for innervation of the parotid gland 
(Fig. 9.15). The otic ganglion is associated with the mandibular 
nerve (CN V3), branches of which convey the postsynaptic 
parasympathetic ﬁ
 bers to the parotid gland.
Somatic (General) Sensory
The general sensory branches of CN IX are as follows 
(Fig. 9.13):
• The tympanic nerve.
• The carotid sinus nerve to the carotid sinus, a baro- 
(presso-) receptor sensitive to changes in blood pressure, 
and the carotid body, a chemoreceptor sensitive to blood 
gas (oxygen and carbon dioxide levels).
• The pharyngeal, tonsillar, and lingual nerves to the 
mucosa of the oropharynx and isthmus of the fauces (L., 
throat), including palatine tonsil, soft palate, and poste-
rior third of the tongue. In addition to general sensation 
(touch, pain, temperature), tactile (actual or threatened) 
stimuli determined to be unusual or unpleasant here may 
evoke the gag reﬂ
 ex or even vomiting.
Special Sensory (Taste)
Taste fibers are conveyed from the posterior third of 
the tongue to the sensory inferior ganglia of CN IX 
(Fig. 9.14). Details of the distribution of CN IX are 
 
outlined in Figure 9.13.
VESTIBULOCOCHLEAR NERVE
¨ The vestibulocochlear nerves (CN VIII) carry ﬁ
 bers 
 
concerned with the special senses of hearing, equilibrium, 
and motion. ¨ The nerves originate from the grooves 
between the pons and medulla. ¨ They run through the 
internal acoustic meatus and divide into the cochlear and 
vestibular nerves. ¨ The cochlear nerve is sensory to the 
spiral organ (for the sense of hearing). ¨ The vestibular 
nerve is sensory to the cristae of the ampullae of the 
semicircular ducts and the maculae of the saccule and 
utricle (for the sense of equilibration and motion).
The Bottom Line
GLOSSOPHARYNGEAL NERVE (CN IX)
Functions: Sensory—somatic (general) sensory, special sen-
sory (taste), and visceral sensory. Motor—somatic (branchial) 
motor, and visceral (parasympathetic) motor for derivatives 
of the 3rd pharyngeal arch.
Nuclei: Four nuclei in the medulla send or receive ﬁ
 bers 
via CN IX: two motor (nucleus ambiguus and inferior sali-
vary nucleus) and two sensory (sensory nuclei of the tri-
geminal nerve [CN V] and nuclei of the solitary tract). Three 
of these nuclei (in italics) are shared with CN X (Fig. 9.5).
The glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) emerges from 
the lateral aspect of the medulla and passes anterolaterally 
to leave the cranium through the anterior aspect of the jugu-
lar foramen (Figs. 9.13 and 9.14). At this foramen are the 
sensory superior and inferior ganglia of CN IX, which 
contain the pseudounipolar cell bodies for the afferent com-
ponents of the nerve. CN IX follows the stylopharyngeus, 
the only muscle the nerve supplies, and passes between the 
superior and middle pharyngeal constrictor muscles to reach 
the oropharynx and tongue. It contributes sensory ﬁ
 bers to 
the pharyngeal plexus of nerves. CN IX is afferent from the 
tongue and pharynx (hence its name) and efferent to the sty-
lopharyngeus and parotid gland.
GLOSSOPHARYNGEAL NERVE
¨ The glossopharyngeal nerves (CN IX) send somatic 
motor ﬁ
 bers to the stylopharyngeus and visceral motor 
(presynaptic parasympathetic) ﬁ
 bers to the otic gan-
glion for innervation of the parotid gland. ¨ They also 
send sensory ﬁ
 bers to the posterior third of the tongue 
(including taste), pharynx, tympanic cavity, pharyngo-
tympanic cavity, carotid body, and carotid sinus. ¨ The 
nerves originate from the rostral end of the medulla and 
exit from the cranium via the jugular foramina. ¨ They 
pass between the superior and the middle pharyngeal 
constrictors to the tonsillar sinus and enter the posterior 
third of the tongue.
The Bottom Line
