# Page 1014

Chapter 8  •  Neck
984
The cervical vertebrae, cervical IV joints, and movement of 
the cervical region of the vertebral column are described with 
the back (Chapter 4); therefore, only a brief review follows.
The four typical cervical vertebrae (3rd–6th) have the 
 
following characteristics (Fig. 8.2A & D):
• The vertebral body is small and longer from side to side 
than anteroposteriorly; the superior surface is concave, 
and the inferior surface is convex.
• The vertebral foramen is large and triangular.
• The transverse processes of all cervical vertebrae (typical 
or atypical) include foramina transversaria for the ver-
tebral vessels (the vertebral veins and, except for vertebra 
C7, the vertebral arteries).
• The superior facets of the articular processes are directed 
superoposteriorly, and the inferior facets are directed 
inferoposteriorly.
• Their spinous processes are short and, in individuals of 
European heritage, biﬁ
 d.
There are three atypical cervical vertebrae (C1, C2, and C7) 
(Fig. 8.2A):
• The C1 vertebra or atlas: a ring-like, kidney-shaped bone 
lacking a spinous process or body and consisting of two 
lateral masses connected by anterior and posterior arches. 
Its concave superior articular facets receive the occipital 
condyles.
• The C2 vertebra or axis: a peg-like dens (odontoid  
process) 
projects superiorly from its body.
• The vertebra prominens (C7): so-named because of its 
long spinous process, which is not biﬁ
 d. Its transverse pro-
cesses are large, but its foramina transversaria are small.
Hyoid Bone
The mobile hyoid bone (or simply, the hyoid), lies in the 
anterior part of the neck at the level of the C3 vertebra in 
the angle between the mandible and the thyroid cartilage 
(Fig. 8.3). The hyoid is suspended by muscles that connect it 
to the mandible, styloid processes, thyroid cartilage, manu-
brium of the sternum, and scapulae.
The hyoid is unique among bones for its isolation from the 
remainder of the skeleton. The U-shaped hyoid derives its 
name from the Greek word hyoeidçs, meaning “shaped like the 
letter upsilon,” the 20th letter in the Greek alphabet. The hyoid 
does not articulate with any other bone. It is suspended from 
the styloid processes of the temporal bones by the stylohyoid 
ligaments (Fig. 8.3A) and is ﬁ
 rmly bound to the thyroid carti-
lage. The hyoid consists of a body and greater and lesser horns 
(L. cornua). Functionally, the hyoid serves as an attachment 
for anterior neck muscles and a prop to keep the airway open.
The body of the hyoid, its middle part, faces anteriorly 
and is approximately 2.5 cm wide and 1 cm thick (Fig. 8.3B 
& C). Its anterior convex surface projects anterosuperiorly; its 
posterior concave surface projects postero-inferiorly. Each 
end of its body is united to a greater horn that projects pos-
terosuperiorly and laterally from the body. In young people, 
the greater horns are united to the body by ﬁ
 brocartilage. 
In older people, the horns are usually united by bone. Each 
lesser horn is a small bony projection from the superior part 
of the body of the hyoid near its union with the greater horn. 
It is connected to the body of the hyoid by ﬁ
 brous tissue and 
sometimes to the greater horn by a synovial joint. The lesser 
horn projects superoposteriorly toward the styloid process; 
it may be partly or completely cartilaginous in some adults.
(C) Anterosuperior view 
Mandible  
Angle of mandible  
Greater horn
Greater horn
Lesser horn
Lesser horn
Body 
Fibrocartilage
Body of hyoid bone         
Clavicle
Trachea
Styloid process        
Mastoid process       
Stylohyoid ligament
Hyoid bone    
Thyroid cartilage
(B) Right anterolateral view 
(A) Lateral view    
Manubrium
of sternum
FIGURE 8.3. Bones and cartilages of neck. A. The bony and cartilaginous landmarks of the neck are the vertebrae, mastoid and styloid processes, angles 
of the mandible, hyoid bone, thyroid cartilage, clavicle, and manubrium of the sternum. B and C. The hyoid bone and its features are demonstrated.
