# Page 1079

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1049
they may not enlarge and become visible until early adult-
hood. The sinus and cyst are usually excised. The cyst 
passes close to the hypoglossal, glossopharyngeal, and spi-
nal accessory nerves (Fig. 8.46A). Therefore, care must be 
taken to avoid damage to these nerves during removal of 
the cyst.
Esophageal Injuries
Esophageal injuries are the rarest kinds of pene-
trating neck trauma; however, they cause most 
complications after a surgical procedure or other 
treatment. Most esophageal injuries occur in conjunction 
with airway injuries because the airway lies anterior to the 
esophagus and provides some protection to it. Esophageal 
injuries are often occult (hidden), which makes the injury 
difﬁ
 cult to detect, especially if it is isolated. Unrecognized 
esophageal perforation is fatal in nearly all non-operative 
cases and in approximately 50% of surgical occurances 
(Sinkinson, 1991).
Tracheo-Esophageal Fistula
The most common birth defect of the esophagus is 
tracheo-esophageal ﬁ
 stula (TEF). Usually, it is com-
bined with some form of esophageal atresia. In the 
most common type of TEF (approximately 90% of cases), 
the superior part of the esophagus ends in a blind pouch and 
the inferior part communicates with the trachea (Fig. B8.17A). 
In these cases, the pouch ﬁ
 lls with mucus, which the infant 
aspirates. In some cases, the superior esophagus communi-
cates with the trachea and the inferior esophagus joins the 
stomach (Fig. B8.17C), but sometimes it does not, producing 
TEF with esophageal atresia (Fig. B8.17B). TEFs result 
from failures in partitioning of the esophagus and trachea 
(Moore et al., 2012).
Esophageal Cancer
The most common presenting complaint of esopha-
geal cancer is dysphagia (difﬁ
 culty in swallowing), 
which is not usually recognized until the lumen is 
reduced by 30–50%. Esophagoscopy is a common diagnostic 
tool for observing these cancers. Painful swallowing in some 
patients suggests extension of the tumor to peri-esophageal 
tissues. Enlargement of the inferior deep cervical lymph 
nodes also suggests esophageal cancer. Compression of the 
recurrent laryngeal nerves by an esophageal tumor produces 
hoarseness.
Zones of Penetrating Neck Trauma
Three zones are common clinical guides to the seri-
ousness of neck trauma (Fig. B8.18). The zones 
give physicians an understanding of the structures 
that are at risk with penetrating neck injuries.
Atresia of superior
part of esophagus
Esophageal
atresia
Trachea
Fistula
Fistula in 
absence 
of atresia
Inferior part
of esophagus
(A)
(B)
(C)
FIGURE B8.17. Tracheo-esophageal ﬁ
 stulae (TEF).
• Zone I: includes the root of the neck and extends from 
the clavicles and the manubrium to the level of the infe-
rior border of the cricoid cartilage. Structures at risk are 
the cervical pleurae, apices of lungs, thyroid and para-
thyroid glands, trachea, esophagus, common carotid 
arteries, jugular veins, and the cervical region of the ver-
tebral column.
• Zone II: extends from the cricoid cartilage to the level 
of the angles of the mandible. Structures at risk are the 
superior poles of the thyroid gland, thyroid and cricoid 
cartilages, larynx, laryngopharynx, carotid arteries,  
jugular 
