# Page 1035

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1005
The inferior petrosal sinus leaves the cranium through 
the jugular foramen and enters the superior bulb of the IJV 
(Fig. 8.20). The facial vein empties into the IJV opposite or 
just inferior to the level of the hyoid. The facial vein may 
receive the superior thyroid, lingual, or sublingual veins. The 
lingual veins form a single vein from the tongue, which emp-
ties into the IJV at the level of origin of the lingual artery. 
The pharyngeal veins arise from the venous plexus on the 
pharyngeal wall and empty into the IJV approximately at the 
level of the angle of the mandible. The superior and middle 
thyroid veins leave the thyroid gland and drain into the IJV.
NERVES IN ANTERIOR CERVICAL REGION
Several nerves, including branches of cranial nerves, are 
located in the anterior cervical region.
• Transverse cervical nerve (C2 and C3): supplies the 
skin covering the anterior cervical region. This nerve was 
discussed with the cervical plexus earlier in this chapter 
(Figs. 8.8 and 8.13).
• Hypoglossal nerve (CN XII): the motor nerve of the 
tongue, enters the submandibular triangle deep to the 
posterior belly of the digastric muscle to supply the intrin-
sic and four of the ﬁ
 ve extrinsic muscles of the tongue 
(Figs. 8.13A, 8.15, and 8.21). The nerve passes between 
the external carotid and jugular vessels and gives off the 
superior root of the ansa cervicalis and then a branch 
to the geniohyoid muscle (Fig. 8.13). In both cases, the 
branch conveys only ﬁ
 bers from the C1 spinal nerve, 
which joined its proximal part; no hypoglossal ﬁ
 bers are 
conveyed in these branches (see Chapter 9 for details).
• Branches of the glossopharyngeal (CN IX) and vagus 
(CN X) nerves: in the submandibular and carotid triangles 
(Figs. 8.15 and 8.21). CN IX is primarily related to the 
tongue and pharynx. In the neck, CN X gives rise to pha-
ryngeal, laryngeal, and cardiac branches.
Surface Anatomy of Cervical Regions 
and Triangles of Neck
The skin of the neck is thin and pliable. The subcutaneous 
tissue contains the platysma, a thin sheet of striated muscle 
that ascends to the face (Figs. 8.5 and 8.22A). Its ﬁ
 bers can be 
observed, especially in thin people, by asking them to contract 
the platysma muscles (e.g., by pretending to ease a tight collar).
The SCM is the key muscular landmark of the neck. It 
deﬁ
 nes the sternocleidomastoid region and divides the neck 
into anterior and lateral cervical regions (Fig. 8.22B). This 
broad bulging muscle is easy to observe and palpate through-
out its length as it passes superolaterally from the sternum 
and clavicle. Its superior attachment to the mastoid process 
is palpable posterior to the lobule of the auricle. The SCM 
can be made to stand out by asking the person to rotate the 
face toward the contralateral side and elevate the chin. In 
this contracted state, the anterior and posterior borders of 
the muscle are clearly deﬁ
 ned.
The jugular notch of the manubrium forms the inferior 
boundary of the fossa between the sternal heads of the SCMs 
(Fig. 8.22C & D). The supra 
sternal space and jugular venous 
arch are located superior to this notch (Fig. 8.16). The lesser 
supraclavicular fossa, between the sternal and the clavicu-
lar heads of the SCM, overlies the inferior end of the IJV 
(Fig. 8.22B & D). It can be entered here by a needle or cath-
eter (see “Internal Jugular Vein Puncture,” p. 1011).
The EJV runs vertically across the SCM toward the angle 
of the mandible (Fig. 8.22D). It may be prominent, especially 
External carotid artery
Mastoid process
External acoustic meatus
Glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX)
Hypoglossal nerve (CN XII)
Superior root of ansa cervicalis
Spinal accessory nerve (CN XI)
Occipital artery
Digastric, posterior belly
Digastric, anterior belly
Internal jugular vein
Internal carotid artery
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Carotid sheath
Common carotid artery
Right lateral view
Mylohyoid
Facial artery
Lingual artery
Hyoglossus
Nerve to thyrohyoid
Hyoid
Superior thyroid artery
FIGURE 8.21. Relationships of nerves and vessels to suprahyoid muscles of anterior cervical region. The posterior belly of the digastric muscle, running 
from the mastoid process to the hyoid, holds a superﬁ
 cial and key position in the neck.
