# Page 1082

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1052
the cervicodorsal trunk. The main group of deep cervical 
lymph nodes forms a chain along the IJV, mostly under cover 
of the SCM. Other deep cervical nodes include the prelaryn-
geal, pretracheal, paratracheal, and retropharyngeal nodes. 
Efferent lymphatic vessels from the deep cervical nodes join 
to form the jugular lymphatic trunks, which usually join 
the thoracic duct on the left side and enter the junction of 
the internal jugular and subclavian veins (right venous angle) 
directly or via a short right lymphatic duct on the right.
The thoracic duct passes superiorly through the superior 
thoracic aperture along the left border of the esophagus. It 
arches laterally in the root of the neck, posterior to the carotid 
sheath and anterior to the sympathetic trunk and vertebral 
and subclavian arteries (Fig. 8.51B). The thoracic duct enters 
the left brachiocephalic vein at the junction of the subclavian 
and IJVs (left venous angle). When the right jugular, subcla-
vian, and bronchomediastinal lymphatic trunks unite to form 
a right lymphatic duct, it enters the right venous angle as the 
thoracic duct does on the left (Fig. 8.51A). Often, however, 
these lymphatic trunks enter the venous system indepen-
dently in the region of the right venous angle.
LYMPHATICS IN NECK
Radical Neck Dissections
Radical neck dissections are performed when 
cancer invades the cervical lymphatics. During 
the procedure, the deep cervical lymph nodes 
and tissues around them are removed as completely as 
possible. The major arteries, brachial plexus, CN X, and 
phrenic nerve are preserved; however, most cutaneous 
branches of the cervical plexus are removed. The aim of 
the dissection is to remove all tissue that bears lymph 
nodes in one piece. The deep cervical lymph nodes, par-
ticularly those located along the cervicodorsal trunk, may 
be involved in the spread of cancer from the thorax and 
abdomen. Because their enlargement may give the ﬁ
 rst 
clue to cancer in these regions, they are often referred to 
as the cervical sentinel lymph nodes.
Board-review questions, case studies, and additional resources are available at thePoint.lww.com.
