# Page 1059

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1029
 
thyroid cartilage anteriorly and inferiorly toward the arch 
of the cricoid cartilage. This increases the distance between 
the thyroid prominence and the arytenoid cartilages. 
Because the anterior ends of the vocal ligaments attach to 
the posterior aspect of the prominence, the vocal ligaments 
elongate and tighten, raising the pitch of the voice.
• Relaxers: The principal muscles in this group are the thyro-
arytenoid muscles, which pull the arytenoid cartilages 
anteriorly, toward the thyroid angle (prominence), thereby 
relaxing the vocal ligaments to lower the pitch of the voice.
The vocalis muscles lie medial to the thyro-arytenoid mus-
cles and lateral to the vocal ligaments within the vocal folds. 
The vocalis muscles produce minute adjustments of the vocal 
ligaments, selectively tensing and relaxing the anterior and 
posterior parts, respectively, of the vocal folds during ani-
mated speech and singing.
Arteries of Larynx. The laryngeal arteries, branches of 
the superior and inferior thyroid arteries, supply the larynx 
(Fig. 8.39). The superior laryngeal artery accompanies 
the internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve through 
(phonation). When the vocal ligaments are adducted, but 
the transverse arytenoid muscles do not act, the arytenoid 
cartilages remain apart and air may bypass the ligaments. 
This is the position of whispering when the breath is mod-
iﬁ
 ed into voice in the absence of tone. The sole abductors 
are the posterior crico-arytenoid muscles, which pull 
the muscular processes posteriorly, rotating the vocal pro-
cesses laterally and thus widening the rima glottidis.
• Sphincters: The combined actions of most of the muscles 
of the laryngeal inlet result in a sphincteric action that 
closes the laryngeal inlet as a protective mechanism during 
swallowing. Contraction of the lateral crico-arytenoids, 
transverse and oblique arytenoids, and ary-epiglottic 
muscles brings the ary-epiglottic folds together and pulls 
the arytenoid cartilages toward the epiglottis. This action 
occurs reﬂ
 exively in response to the presence of liquid or 
particles approaching or within the laryngeal vestibule. It 
is perhaps our strongest reﬂ
 ex, diminishing only after loss 
of consciousness, as in drowning.
• Tensors: The principal tensors are the cricothyroid 
muscles, which tilt or pull the prominence or angle of the 
Superior thyroid
artery
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Superior laryngeal
nerve
Internal branch
External branch
Cricothyroid muscle
Thyrohyoid membrane
Inferior laryngeal
nerve
Pretracheal lymph 
nodes
Paratracheal lymph
nodes
Left recurrent laryngeal
nerve
Left brachiocephalic
vein
Superior 
laryngeal nerve
Superior deep
cervical lymph
nodes
Superior laryngeal
artery and vein
Superior thyroid
vein
Inferior laryngeal
artery
Inferior thyroid
artery
Middle thyroid vein
Internal jugular
vein (IJV)
Inferior deep
cervical lymph
nodes
Right brachiocephalic
vein
Inferior thyroid
veins
Thyrocervical trunk
Cricothyroid artery 
Arch of aorta
Trachea
FIGURE 8.39. Vessels, nerves, and lymph nodes of larynx. The superior and inferior thyroid arteries give rise to the superior and inferior laryngeal arteries, 
respectively; they anastomose with each other. The laryngeal nerves are derived from the vagus (CN X) through the internal and external branches of the supe-
rior laryngeal nerve and the inferior laryngeal nerve from the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The left recurrent laryngeal nerve passes inferior to the arch of the aorta.
