# Page 1002

Chapter 7  •  Head
972
where it articulates with the head of the malleus (Fig. 7.116C). 
The long limb lies parallel to the handle of the malleus, and its 
interior end articulates with the stapes by way of the lenticular 
process, a medially directed projection. The short limb is con-
nected by a ligament to the posterior wall of the tympanic cavity.
Stapes. The stapes (L. stirrup) is the smallest ossicle. It 
has a head, two limbs, and a base (Fig. 7.116D). Its head, 
directed laterally, articulates with the incus (Fig. 7.116A). The 
base (footplate) of the stapes ﬁ
 ts into the oval window on the 
medial wall of the tympanic cavity. The oval base is attached 
to the margins of the oval window. The base of the stapes is 
considerably smaller than the tympanic membrane; as a result, 
the vibratory force of the stapes is increased approximately 10 
times over that of the tympanic membrane. Consequently, the 
auditory ossicles increase the force but decrease the amplitude 
of the vibrations transmitted from the tympanic membrane 
through the ossicles to the internal ear (see Fig. 7.120).
Muscles Associated with Auditory Ossicles. Two 
muscles dampen or resist movements of the auditory ossicles; 
one also dampens movements (vibration) of the tympanic 
membrane. The tensor tympani is a short muscle that arises 
from the superior surface of the cartilaginous part of the pha-
ryngotympanic tube, the greater wing of the sphenoid, and the 
petrous part of the temporal bone (Figs. 7.113A and 7.114). 
The muscle inserts into the handle of the malleus. The ten-
sor tympani pulls the handle medially, tensing the tympanic 
membrane and reducing the amplitude of its oscillations. 
This action tends to prevent damage to the internal ear when 
one is exposed to loud sounds. The tensor tympani is sup-
plied by the mandibular nerve (CN V3).
The stapedius is a tiny muscle inside the pyramidal 
eminence (pyramid), a hollow, cone-shaped prominence on 
the posterior wall of the tympanic cavity (Figs. 7.112B and 
7.114B). Its tendon enters the tympanic cavity by emerging 
(A) Lateral view
Auriculotemporal 
nerve
Secretory branches
External carotid artery
Occipital artery
Glossopharyngeal 
nerve (CN IX)
Ascending 
pharyngeal artery
External carotid 
artery
Hypoglossal nerve 
(CN XII)
Internal
carotid artery
Vagus nerve
(CN X)
Internal
jugular vein
Posterior belly
of digastric
Auricular branch of
vagus nerve
External acoustic meatus
Facial nerve
(CN VII)
Mastoid process
Spinal accessory
nerve (CN XI)
(B) Lateral view
Pterygoid a.
Masseter a.
Inferior alveolar a.
External carotid a.
Maxillary artery (a.)
Superficial
temporal a.
Deep
auricular a.
Anterior
tympanic a.
Middle meningeal a.
Accessory meningeal a.
Maxillary artery
Area shown in (A)
FIGURE 7.115. Neurovascular structures in vicinity of external and middle ear. A. In this dissection of structures deep to parotid bed, the facial nerve 
(CN VII), the posterior belly of the digastric muscle, and the nerve to it are retracted. The deeply placed ascending pharyngeal artery is the only medial 
branch of the external carotid artery. It supplies the pharynx, palatine tonsil, pharyngotympanic tube, and the medial wall of the tympanic cavity before it 
terminates by sending meningeal branches to the cranial cavity. B. Maxillary artery and its branches. The branches of the ﬁ
 rst (mandibular) part supply the 
external acoustic meatus and tympanic membrane. The middle meningeal artery sends branches to the pharyngotympanic tube before entering the cranium 
through the foramen spinosum.
