# Page 1104

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1074
The vagus nerve (CN X) has the longest course and 
most extensive distribution of all the cranial nerves, most of 
which is outside of (inferior to) the head. The term vagus
is derived from the Latin word vagary, meaning “wander-
ing.” CN X was so called because of its extensive distribution 
(Table 9.5). It arises by a series of rootlets from the lateral 
aspect of the medulla that merge and leave the cranium 
through the jugular foramen positioned between CN IX and 
CN XI (Figs. 9.14 and 9.16).
What was formerly called the “cranial root of the accessory 
nerve” is actually a part of CN X (Fig. 9.17). CN X has a supe-
rior ganglion in the jugular foramen that is mainly concerned 
with the general sensory component of the nerve. Inferior to 
the foramen is an inferior ganglion (nodose ganglion) con-
cerned with the visceral and special sensory components of 
the nerve (Fig. 9.14). In the region of the superior ganglion are 
connections to CN IX and the superior cervical (sympathetic) 
ganglion. CN X continues inferiorly in the carotid sheath to 
the root of the neck (see Chapter 8), supplying branches to the 
palate, pharynx, and larynx (Fig. 9.16; Table 9.5).
The courses of the vagi are asymmetrical in the thorax, a 
consequence of rotation of the midgut during development 
(see Chapters 1 and 2). CN X supplies branches to the heart, 
bronchi, and lungs. The vagi form anterior and posterior 
vagal trunks that are continuations of the esophageal plexus
surrounding the esophagus, which is also joined by branches 
of the sympathetic trunks. The trunks pass with the esophagus 
through the dia 
phragm into the abdomen, where the vagal 
trunks break up into branches that innervate the stomach 
and intestinal tract as far as the left colic ﬂ
 exure.
Glossopharyngeal 
nerve (CN IX)
Internal carotid artery
Superior ganglion of 
glossopharyngeal nerve 
Inferior ganglion of 
glossopharyngeal nerve 
Pharyngeal nerve 
Carotid sheath 
Superior laryngeal nerve
Internal laryngeal nerve
External laryngeal nerve
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Spinal accessory
nerve (CN XI)
Internal jugular vein
Jugular foramen
Superior ganglion of 
vagus nerve
Inferior ganglion of 
vagus nerve
FIGURE 9.14. Relationship of structures traversing jugular foramen. CN IX, CN X, and CN XI are, in numerical order, anterior to the internal jugular vein 
as they traverse the foramen. They are immediately posterior to the internal carotid artery as they emerge from it. The superior and inferior sensory ganglia of 
CN IX and CN X are seen as thickenings of those nerves immediately inferior to their exit from the cranium.
VAGUS NERVE
¨ The vagus nerves (CN X) supply motor ﬁ
 bers to the 
voluntary muscles of the larynx and superior esophagus. 
¨ They also send visceral motor (presynaptic parasympa-
thetic) ﬁ
 bers to the involuntary muscles and glands of:
(1) the tracheobronchial tree and esophagus via the pulmo-
nary and esophageal plexuses, (2) to the heart via the car-
diac plexus, and (3) to the alimentary tract as far as the left 
colic ﬂ
 exure via the vagal trunks. ¨ The vagus nerves also 
send sensory ﬁ
 bers to the pharynx, larynx, and reﬂ
 ex affer-
ents from these same areas (1-3 above). ¨ They originate 
via 8–10 rootlets from the lateral sides of the medulla of the 
brainstem. They enter the superior mediastinum posterior 
to the sterno 
clavicular joints and brachiocephalic veins. 
¨ The nerves give rise to right and left recurrent nerves and 
then, from the esophageal plexus, reform as anterior and 
posterior vagal trunks, which continue into the abdomen.
The Bottom Line
