# Page 933

Chapter 7  •  Head
903
 
muscles, called the medial and lateral check ligaments, 
are attached to the lacrimal and zygomatic bones, respec-
tively. These ligaments limit abduction and adduction. A 
blending of the check ligaments with the fascia of the infe-
rior rectus and inferior oblique muscles forms a hammock-
like sling, the suspensory ligament of the eyeball. A 
similar inferior check ligament from the fascial sheath of 
the inferior rectus retracts the inferior eyelid when the gaze 
is directed downward (Fig. 7.45A). Collectively, the check 
ligaments act with the oblique muscles and the retrobul-
bar fat to resist the posterior pull on the eyeball produced 
by the rectus muscles. In diseases or starvation that reduce 
the retrobulbar fat, the eyeball is retracted into the orbit 
(inophthalmos).
Nerves of Orbit
The large optic nerves convey purely sensory nerves that 
transmit impulses generated by optical stimuli (Figs. 7.45A 
and 7.50A). They are cranial nerves (CN II) by convention, 
but develop as paired anterior extensions of the forebrain 
and are actually central nervous system (CNS) ﬁ
 ber tracts 
formed of second-order neurons. The optic nerves begin 
at the lamina cribrosa of the sclera, where the unmy-
elinated nerve ﬁ
 bers pierce the sclera and become myelin-
ated, posterior to the optic disc. They exit the orbits via the 
optic canals. Throughout their course in the orbit, the optic 
nerves are surrounded by extensions of the cranial menin-
ges and subarachnoid space, the latter occupied by a thin 
layer of CSF (Fig. 7.45A, inset). The intra-orbital exten-
sions of the cranial dura and arachnoid constitute the optic 
nerve sheath, which becomes continuous anteriorly with 
the fascial sheath of the eyeball and the sclera. A layer of 
pia mater covers the surface of the optic nerve within the 
sheath.
In addition to the optic nerve (CN II), the nerves of the 
orbit include those that enter through the superior orbital 
ﬁ
 ssure and supply the ocular muscles: oculomotor (CN 
III), trochlear (CN IV), and abducent (CN VI) nerves 
(Figs. 7.55 and 7.57). A memory device for the innervation 
of the extra-ocular muscles moving the eyeball is similar 
to a chemical formula: LR6SO4AO3 (lateral rectus, CN VI; 
superior oblique, CN IV; all others, CN III). The troch-
lear and abducent nerves pass directly to the single muscle 
supplied by each nerve. The oculomotor nerve divides into 
a superior and an inferior division. The superior division 
supplies the superior rectus and levator palpebrae superi-
oris. The inferior division supplies the medial and inferior 
rectus and inferior oblique and carries presynaptic para-
sympathetic ﬁ
 bers to the ciliary ganglion (Fig. 7.58). The 
movements are stimulated by the oculomotor, trochlear, 
and abducent nerves, starting from the primary position in 
the right and left orbits, and produce binocular vision, dem-
onstrated in Fig. 7.59.
Lateral view of right eye
Medulla
oblongata
Pons
Trochlear nerve (CN IV)
Oculomotor nerve (CN III)
Ophthalmic nerve (CN V1)
Nasociliary nerve
Frontal nerve
Ciliary ganglion
Medial rectus
Superior rectus
Lacrimal nerve (CN V1)
Levator palpebrae superioris
Superior oblique
Trochlea
Lacrimal gland
Lateral rectus
Superior palpebral nerve
Inferior palpebral nerve
Infra-orbital nerve
Inferior oblique
Inferior rectus
Zygomatic
nerve
Pterygopalatine ganglion
Nerve of pterygoid canal
Maxillary nerve (CN V2)
Abducent nerve (CN VI)
Root of
trigeminal
nerve
(CN V)
Inferior branch
Superior branch
FIGURE 7.57. Nerves of orbit. Three cranial nerves (CN III, IV, and VI) supply the seven voluntary extra-ocular muscles. CN IV supplies the superior 
oblique, CN VI supplies the lateral rectus, and CN III supplies the remaining ﬁ
 ve muscles. The CN III also brings presynaptic parasympathetic ﬁ
 bers to the 
ciliary ganglion. The trigeminal nerve (CN V) supplies sensory ﬁ
 bers to the orbit, orbital region, and eyeball.
