# Page 1004

Chapter 7  •  Head
974
Cochlea
Anterior
Lateral
Posterior
Vestibule
Vestibular aqueduct
Semicircular
canals
(A) Superior view of internal surface of cranial base
Direction of view for 
parts B–D
Of temporal
bone
Squamous part
of temporal bone
Petrosquamous fissure
Petrous part
Mastoid part
Internal acoustic meatus
Foramen magnum
(B) Anterolateral view of left otic capsule
Anterior semicircular canal
and bony ampulla
Lateral semicircular
canal and bony ampulla
Facial canal, opened 
(canal for facial 
nerve)
Cupula
2nd turn
Cochlea
1st turn
Round window
Posterior
semicircular
canal and
bony ampulla
Vestibule and oval window
(C) Anterolateral view of left membranous labyrinth
      (through transparent otic capsule)
Anterior semicircular duct
and membranous
ampulla
Cochlear duct
Ductus 
reuniens
Saccule
Lateral semicircular duct
Common crus
Posterior
semicircular
duct
Endolymphatic sac
Utricle
Secondary tympanic
membrane
(D) Anterolateral view of left membranous labyrinth
Anterior semicircular
duct and membranous
ampulla (with ampulla crest)
Maculae
Cochlear duct
Saccule
Utriculosaccular 
duct
Endolymphatic duct
Lateral semicircular duct
Posterior semicircular duct
Ductus reuniens
Endolymphatic sac
FIGURE 7.117. Bony and membranous labyrinths of internal ear. A. This view of the interior of the base of the cranium shows the temporal bone and 
the location of the bony labyrinth. B. The walls of the bony labyrinth have been carved out of the petrous temporal bone. C. A similar view of the bony 
labyrinth occupied by perilymph and the membranous labyrinth is shown. D. The membranous labyrinth, shown after removal from the bony labyrinth, is a 
closed system of ducts and chambers ﬁ
 lled with endolymph and bathed by perilymph. It has three parts: the cochlear duct, which occupies the cochlea; the 
saccule and utricle, which occupy the vestibule; and the three semicircular ducts, which occupy the semicircular canals. The utricle communicates with the 
saccule through the utriculosaccular duct. The lateral semicircular duct lies in the horizontal plane and is more horizontal than it appears in this drawing.
