# Page 1055

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1025
• Vocalis muscle, composed of exceptionally ﬁ
 ne muscle 
ﬁ
 bers immediately lateral to and terminating at intervals 
relative to the length of the vocal ligaments (Fig. 8.35A).
The vocal folds are the sharp-edged folds of mucous mem-
brane overlying and incorporating the vocal ligaments and 
the thyro-arytenoid muscles. They are the source of the 
sounds (tone) that come from the larynx. These folds pro-
duce audible vibrations when their free margins are closely 
(but not tightly) apposed during phonation, and air is forcibly 
expired intermittently (Fig. 8.36C). The vocal folds also serve 
as the main inspiratory sphincter of the larynx when they are 
tightly closed. Complete adduction of the folds forms an 
effective sphincter that prevents entry of air.
The glottis (the vocal apparatus of the larynx) makes up 
the vocal folds and processes, together with the rima glot-
tidis, the aperture between the vocal folds (Fig. 8.35C). The 
shape of the rima (L. slit) varies according to the position of 
the vocal folds (Fig. 8.36). During ordinary breathing, the 
rima is narrow and wedge shaped; during forced respiration, 
it is wide and trapezoidal in shape. The rima glottidis is slit-
like when the vocal folds are closely approximated during 
phonation. Variation in the tension and length of the vocal 
folds, in the width of the rima glottidis, and in the intensity 
of the expiratory effort produces changes in the pitch of the 
 
cricoid cartilage, where it is continuous with the lumen of 
the trachea.
The vocal folds control sound production (Figs. 8.35 and 
8.36). The apex of each wedge-shaped fold projects medially 
into the laryngeal cavity. Each vocal fold contains a:
• Vocal ligament, consisting of thickened elastic tissue that is the 
medial free edge of the conus elasticus (Figs. 8.32E and 8.34).
Body of hyoid 
Superior view
Hyo-epiglottic ligament
Median
glosso-epiglottic
fold
Greater horn
Lesser horn
Epiglottis
FIGURE 8.33. Epiglottis and hyo-epiglottic ligament. The epiglottis is 
a leaf-shaped plate of elastic ﬁ
 brocartilage, which is covered with mucous 
membrane (pink) and is attached anteriorly to the hyoid by the hyo-epiglottic 
ligament (blue). The epiglottis serves as a diverter valve over the superior 
aperture of the larynx during swallowing.
Epiglottis
Epiglottic cartilage
Mucous membrane
Posterior view
Lamina of cricoid cartilage
Vestibular fold
Arytenoid (cut surface)
Corniculate tubercle
Cuneiform tubercle
Ary-epiglottic fold
Tracheal ring
Surgical needle spreading halves of cricoid cartilage
Lateral cricothyroid ligament
Posterior crico-arytenoid ligament
Arytenoid cartilage, medial surface
Corniculate cartilage
Cuneiform cartilage
Quadrangular membrane
Vocal process of arytenoid cartilage
Conus
elasticus
Left boundary of
laryngeal inlet
Superior horn of
thyroid cartilage
Vocal ligament
Vestibular ligament
Vocal fold
Ventricle
FIGURE 8.34. Interior of larynx. The posterior wall of the larynx is split in the median plane, and the two sides are spread apart and held in place 
by a surgical needle. On the left side, the mucous membrane is intact. On the right side, the mucous and submucous coats are peeled off, and the skeletal 
coat—consisting of cartilages, ligaments, and the ﬁ
 bro-elastic membrane—is uncovered.
