# Page 1110

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1080
Visual Field Defects 
Visual ﬁ
 eld defects result from lesions that affect 
different parts of the visual pathway. The type of 
defect depends on where the pathway is interrupted 
(Fig. B9.1):
• Complete section of an optic nerve results in blindness in 
the temporal (T) and nasal (N) visual ﬁ
 elds of the ipsilat-
eral eye (depicted in black).
• Complete section of the optic chiasm reduces peripheral 
vision and results in bitemporal hemianopsia, the loss of 
vision of one half of the visual ﬁ
 eld of both eyes.
• Complete section of the right optic tract at the midline 
eliminates vision from the left temporal and right nasal 
visual ﬁ
 elds. A lesion of the right or left optic tract causes 
a contralateral homonymous hemianopsia, indicating 
that visual loss is in similar ﬁ
 elds. This defect is the most 
common form of visual ﬁ
 eld loss and is often observed in 
patients with strokes (Swartz, 2009).
Defects of vision caused by compression of the optic path-
way, as may result from tumors of the pituitary gland or berry 
aneurysms of the internal carotid arteries (see Chapter 7), 
may produce only part of the visual losses described here. 
Patients may not be aware of changes in their visual ﬁ
 elds 
until late in the course of disease, because lesions affecting 
the visual pathway often develop insidiously.
OCULOMOTOR NERVE
Injury to Oculomotor Nerve
A lesion of CN III results in ipsilateral oculomotor 
palsy, summarized in Table 9.6 and discussed in 
detail in Chapter 7, p. 913.
Compression of Oculomotor Nerve 
Rapidly increasing intracranial pressure (e.g., result-
ing from an extradural hematoma) often compresses 
CN III against the crest of the petrous part of the tem-
poral bone. Because autonomic ﬁ
 bers in CN III are superﬁ
 cial, 
they are affected ﬁ
 rst. As a result, the pupil dilates progressively 
on the injured side. Consequently, the ﬁ
 rst sign of CN III com-
pression is ipsilateral slowness of the pupillary response to light.
Aneurysm of Posterior Cerebral 
or Superior Cerebellar Artery
An aneurysm of a posterior cerebral or superior cer-
ebellar artery may also exert pressure on CN III as 
it passes between these vessels. The effects of this 
pressure depend on its severity. Because CN III lies in the 
lateral wall of the cavernous sinus, injuries or infections of 
the sinus may also affect this nerve.
TROCHLEAR NERVE
CN IV is rarely paralyzed alone. Lesions of the trochlear 
nerve or its nucleus cause paralysis of the superior 
oblique and impair the ability to turn the affected eye-
ball inferomedially. CN IV may be torn when there are severe 
head injuries because of its long intracranial course. The charac-
teristic sign of trochlear nerve injury is diplopia (double vision) 
when looking down. Diplopia occurs because the superior oblique 
normally assists the inferior rectus in depressing the pupil (direct-
ing the gaze downward) and is the only muscle to do so when the 
pupil is adducted. In addition, because the superior oblique is the 
primary muscle producing intorsion of the eyeball, the primary 
muscle producing extorsion (the  
inferior oblique) is unopposed 
when the superior oblique is paralyzed. Thus the direction of gaze 
Visual 
fields
Right monocular blindness
Bitemporal hemianopsia
Left homonymous hemianopsia
Visual 
fields
Visual 
fields
T
T
N
N
N
N
Section of right optic nerve
Section of optic chiasm
Section of right optic tract
FIGURE B9.1 
