# Page 1024

Chapter 8  •  Neck
994
the  
subclavian artery, and part of the occipital artery. The 
thyrocervical trunk, a branch of the subclavian artery (Figs. 
8.9–8.11) most commonly gives rise to a suprascapular artery 
and a cervicodorsal trunk from its lateral aspect; its termi-
nal branches are the ascending cervical and inferior thyroid 
artery (discussed on p. 995).
The suprascapular artery passes inferolaterally across 
the anterior scalene muscle and phrenic nerve (Fig. 8.10). It 
then crosses the third part of the subclavian artery and the 
cords of the brachial plexus. It then passes posterior to the 
clavicle to supply muscles on the posterior aspect of the scap-
ula. Alternately, the suprascapular artery may arise directly 
from the third part of the subclavian artery.
Also arising laterally, the cervicodorsal trunk (Weiglein 
et al., 2005), sometimes known as the transverse cervi-
cal artery, further bifurcates into the superﬁ
 cial cervical 
artery (superﬁ
 cial branch of transverse cervical artery) and 
the dorsal scapular artery (deep branch of transverse cer-
vical artery). These branches run superﬁ
 cially and laterally 
across the phrenic nerve and anterior scalene muscle, 2–3 
cm superior to the clavicle. They then cross or pass through 
the trunks of the brachial plexus, supplying branches to 
their vasa  
nervorum (blood vessels of nerves). The super-
ﬁ
 cial cervical artery passes deep (anterior) to the trape-
zius accompanying the spinal accessory nerve (CN XI). The 
dorsal scapular artery may arise independently, directly 
from the third (or, less often, the second) part of the subcla-
vian artery. When it is a branch of the subclavian, the dor-
sal scapular artery passes laterally through the trunks of the 
brachial plexus, anterior to the middle scalene. Regardless 
of its origin, its distal portion runs deep to the levator scapu-
lae and rhomboid muscles, supplying both and participating 
in the arterial anastomoses around the scapula (Chapter 6). 
The occipital artery, a branch of the external carotid artery, 
enters the lateral cervical region at its apex and ascends over 
the head to supply the posterior half of the scalp (Fig. 8.9).
The subclavian artery supplies blood to the upper limb. 
The third part begins approximately a ﬁ
 nger’s breadth supe-
rior to the clavicle, opposite the lateral border of the anterior 
scalene muscle. It is hidden in the inferior part of the lateral 
cervical region, posterosuperior to the subclavian vein. The 
third part of the artery is the longest and most superﬁ
 cial part. 
It lies on the 1st rib, and its pulsations can be felt by applying 
deep pressure in the omoclavicular triangle. The artery is in 
Sternocleidomastoid
C5 and C3/4 roots of phrenic nerve
Internal jugular vein
Subclavian artery
Brachiocephalic vein
Clavicle
Subclavian vein
Pectoralis major
(sternal head)
Anterior ramus C5
Anterior ramus C6
Anterior scalene
Anterior ramus C7
Anterior ramus C8
Subclavius
Trapezius
Deltoid
Serratus anterior
Branch of anterior
ramus C6
Dorsal scapular
artery
Branches of anterior
ramus C5
Levator scapulae
Pectoralis minor
Middle scalene
Posterior scalene
Suprascapular nerve
Brachial plexus
Artery
Vein
Suprascapular
Axillary artery
Axillary vein
Lateral pectoral nerve
Right anterolateral view
Trunks of brachial plexus
External jugular vein
Cervicodorsal trunk
FIGURE 8.10. Deeper dissection of inferior part of lateral cervical region. All fascia, the omohyoid muscle, and the clavicular head of the pectoralis 
major have been removed to reveal the subclavian vein and third part of the subclavian artery. The internal jugular vein, deep to the SCM, is not in the lateral 
cervical region but is close to it. The brachial plexus of nerves and subclavian vessels pass to the upper limb, the name of the vessels changing to axillary infe-
rior to the clavicle at the lateral border of the 1st rib.
