# Page 1042

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1012
DEEP STRUCTURES OF NECK
The deep structures of the neck are the prevertebral mus-
cles, located posterior to the cervical viscera and anterolateral 
to the cervical vertebral column and the viscera extending 
through the superior thoracic aperture, at the inferiormost 
part or the root of the neck.
Prevertebral Muscles
The anterior and lateral vertebral or prevertebral mus-
cles are deep to prevertebral layer of deep cervical fascia. 
The anterior vertebral muscles, consisting of the longus 
colli and capitis, rectus capitis anterior, and anterior scalene 
muscles, lie directly posterior to the retropharyngeal space 
(Fig. 8.4A & B) and medial to the neurovascular plane of 
the cervical and brachial plexuses and subclavian artery. The 
lateral vertebral muscles, consisting of the rectus capitis 
lateralis, splenius capitis, levator scapulae, and middle and 
posterior scalene muscles, lie posterior to this neuro 
vascular 
plane and (except for the highly placed rectus capitis lateralis) 
form the ﬂ
 oor of the lateral cervical region. These muscles 
are illustrated in Figure 8.23; their attachments, innervation, 
and main actions are given in Table 8.4.
Root of Neck
The root of the neck is the junctional area between the 
thorax and neck (Fig. 8.24A). It is located on the cervical 
side of the superior thoracic aperture, through which pass all 
Levator 
scapulae
Splenius
capitis
Longus colli
Longus capitis
Rectus capitis 
anterior
Middle scalene
Posterior scalene
Posterior scalene
Middle scalene
Anterior scalene
Rectus capitis lateralis
(A) Anterior view
(B) Lateral view
FIGURE 8.23. Prevertebral muscles.
Muscle
Superior Attachment
Inferior Attachment
Innervation
Main Action(s)
Anterior vertebral muscles
Longus colli
Anterior tubercle of C1 
vertebra (atlas); bodies 
of C1–C3 and transverse 
processes of C3–C6 
vertebrae 
Bodies of C5–T3 vertebrae; 
transverse processes of 
C3–C5 vertebrae
Anterior rami of C2–C6 
 
spinal nerves
Flexes neck with rotation 
(torsion) to opposite side if 
acting unilaterallya 
Longus capitis
Basilar part of occipital 
bone 
 
Anterior tubercles of C3–C6 
transverse processes
 
Anterior rami of C1–C3 
 
spinal nerves
Flex headb 
Rectus capitis 
anterior
Base of cranium, just ante-
rior to occipital condyle 
 
Anterior surface of lateral 
mass of atlas (C1 vertebra)
Branches from loop between 
C1 and C2 spinal nerves
Anterior scalene
Transverse processes of 
C3–C6 vertebrae
1st rib
Cervical spinal nerves  
C4–C6
TABLE 8.4. PREVERTEBRAL MUSCLES
