# Page 1030

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1000
of the tongue. It passes into the submandibular triangle, as 
does the nerve to the mylohyoid (a branch of CN V3, which 
also supplies the anterior belly of the digastric), parts of the 
facial artery and vein, and the submental artery (a branch of 
the facial artery) (Figs. 8.14 and 8.15).
The carotid triangle is a vascular area bounded by the 
superior belly of the omohyoid, the posterior belly of the 
digastric, and the anterior border of the SCM (Figs. 8.6, 
8.14A and 8.15). This triangle is important because the 
common carotid artery ascends into it. Its pulse can be aus-
cultated or palpated by compressing it lightly against the 
transverse processes of the cervical vertebrae. At the level 
of the superior border of the thyroid cartilage, the common 
carotid artery divides into the internal and external carotid 
arteries (Figs. 8.15, 8.17, and Fig. 8.19). Located within the 
carotid triangle are the following:
• Carotid sinus: a dilation of the proximal part of the internal 
carotid artery (Fig. 8.17), which may involve the common 
carotid artery. Innervated principally by the glossopharyn-
geal nerve (CN IX) through the carotid sinus nerve as 
well as by the vagus nerve (CN X), it is a baroreceptor (pres-
soreceptor) that reacts to changes in arterial blood pressure.
• Carotid body: a small, reddish brown ovoid mass of tis-
sue in life that lies in a septum on the medial (deep) side of 
the bifurcation of the common carotid artery in close rela-
tion to the carotid sinus. Supplied mainly by the carotid 
sinus nerve (CN IX) and by CN X, it is a chemoreceptor 
that monitors the level of oxygen in the blood. It is stim-
ulated by low levels of oxygen and initiates a reﬂ
 ex that 
increases the rate and depth of respiration, cardiac rate, 
and blood pressure.
The neurovascular structures in the carotid triangle are 
surrounded by the carotid sheath: the carotid arteries 
medially, the IJV laterally, and the vagus nerve posteriorly 
(Fig 8.4B & C). Superiorly, the common carotid is replaced 
by the internal carotid artery. The ansa cervicalis usually lies 
on (or is embedded in) the anterolateral aspect of the sheath 
(Fig. 8.15). Many deep cervical lymph nodes lie along the 
carotid sheath and the IJV.
The muscular triangle is bounded by the superior belly 
of the omohyoid muscle, the anterior border of the SCM, 
and the median plane of the neck (Figs. 8.6 and 8.16). This 
triangle contains the infrahyoid muscles and viscera (e.g., the 
thyroid and parathyroid glands).
Submental lymph node
Sternothyroid
SCM
Sternal head 
Clavicular head
Communicating vein connecting facial
and anterior jugular veins
Sternohyoid
Omohyoid
Mylohyoid
Digastric, anterior belly
Location of mandibular symphysis
Submental artery
Suprasternal space
Jugular venous arch
Visceral layer of pretracheal fascia
Cut edge of investing layer of deep
cervical fascia
Laryngeal prominence
Investing layer of deep cervical fascia
covering submandibular gland
Submental
triangle (dashed lines)
Muscular triangle (outline)
Hyoid
Mandible
FIGURE 8.16. Superﬁ
 cial dissection of anterior cervical region. The submental triangle is bounded inferiorly by the body of the hyoid and laterally by the 
right and left anterior bellies of the digastric muscles. The ﬂ
 oor of this triangle is formed by the two mylohyoid muscles and the raphe between them (not dis-
tinct here; see Fig. 8.14B). The muscular triangle is bounded by the superior belly of the omohyoid, the anterior border of the SCM and the midline.
