# Page 1025

Chapter 8  •  Neck
995
contact with the 1st rib as it passes posterior to the anterior 
scalene muscle; consequently, compression of the subclavian 
artery against this rib can control bleeding in the upper limb. 
The inferior trunk of the brachial plexus lies directly poste-
rior to the third part of the artery. The branches that occa-
sionally arise from the third part (suprascapular artery, dorsal 
scapular artery) are aberrant forms of more typical patterns 
in which they arise elsewhere (from the thyrocervical trunk 
via a cervicodorsal trunk in particular).
VEINS IN LATERAL CERVICAL REGION
The external jugular vein (EJV) begins near the angle 
of the mandible (just inferior to the auricle) by the union 
of the posterior division of the retromandibular vein with 
the posterior auricular vein (Fig. 8.12). The EJV crosses the 
SCM obliquely, deep to the platysma, and enters the antero-
inferior part of the lateral cervical region (Fig. 8.8). It then 
pierces the investing layer of deep cervical fascia, which 
forms the roof of this region, at the posterior border of the 
SCM. The EJV descends to the inferior part of the lateral 
cervical region and terminates in the subclavian vein (Figs. 
8.10 and 8.12). It drains most of the scalp and side of the face.
The subclavian vein, the major venous channel draining 
the upper limb, curves through the inferior part of the lat-
eral cervical region. It passes anterior to the anterior scalene 
muscle and phrenic nerve and unites at the medial border of 
the muscle with the IJV to form the brachiocephalic vein, 
posterior to the medial end of the clavicle. Just superior 
to the clavicle, the EJV receives the cervicodorsal, supra-
scapular, and anterior jugular veins.
NERVES OF LATERAL CERVICAL REGION
The spinal accessory nerve (CN XI) passes deep to the 
SCM, supplying it before entering the lateral cervical region 
at or inferior to the junction of the superior and middle thirds 
of the posterior border of the SCM (Figs. 8.8 and 8.9). The 
nerve passes postero-inferiorly, within or deep to the invest-
ing layer of deep cervical fascia, running on the levator scap-
ulae from which it is separated by the prevertebral layer of 
fascia. CN XI then disappears deep to the anterior border of 
Lateral view of right side
Ascending cervical
Inferior thyroid
Common carotid artery
Vertebral
Cervicodorsal trunk
(transverse 
cervical a.)
Thyrocervical trunk
Suprascapular
Costocervical trunk
Subclavian
Internal thoracic
Axillary artery
Brachiocephalic trunk
1st rib
1
3
2
1
3
2
FIGURE 8.11. Subclavian artery: its parts and branches. There are three 
parts of the subclavian artery: medial (1), posterior (2), and lateral (3) to 
the anterior scalene muscle. The cervicodorsal trunk (transverse cervical 
artery) and suprascapular artery occasionally arise directly (or via a com-
mon trunk) from the second or third parts of the subclavian artery instead 
of directly from the thyrocervical trunk via a common trunk, as shown here, 
or independently.
Superficial
temporal vein
Subclavian vein
Brachiocephalic vein
Anterior jugular vein
Communicating branch
External jugular vein (EJV)
Sternocleidomastoid
Facial vein
Retromandibular
vein
Maxillary vein
Omohyoid
Suprascapular vein
Occipital vein
Posterior auricular vein
Cervicodorsal vein
Middle and posterior scalene
Spinal accessory nerve (CN XI)
Levator scapulae
Trapezius
Splenius
Lateral view
Internal jugular vein (IJV)
Common facial vein
Posterior division
Anterior division
FIGURE 8.12. Superﬁ
 cial veins of neck. 
The superﬁ
 cial temporal and maxillary veins 
merge, forming the retromandibular vein, the 
posterior division of which unites with the 
posterior auricular vein to form the EJV. 
The facial vein receives the anterior division 
of the retromandibular vein before empty-
ing into the internal jugular vein, deep to 
the SCM. The anterior jugular veins may lie 
superﬁ
 cial or deep to the investing layer of 
the deep cervical fascia.
