# Page 1008

Chapter 7  •  Head
978
ear is often secondary to upper respiratory infections. 
Inﬂ
 ammation and swelling of the mucous membrane lining the 
tympanic cavity may cause partial or complete blockage of the 
pharyngotympanic tube (Fig. 7.109). The tympanic membrane 
becomes red and bulges, and the person may complain of “ear 
popping.” An amber-colored bloody ﬂ
 uid may be observed 
through the tympanic membrane. If untreated, otitis media 
may produce impaired hearing owing to scarring of the audi-
tory ossicles, limiting their ability to move in response to sound.
Perforation of Tympanic Membrane
Perforation of the tympanic membrane (“ruptured 
eardrum”) may result from otitis media and is one 
of several causes of middle ear deafness. Perforation 
may also result from foreign bodies in the external acoustic 
meatus, trauma, or excessive pressure (e.g., during scuba div-
ing). Minor ruptures of the tympanic membrane often heal 
spontaneously. Large ruptures usually require surgical repair. 
Because the superior half of the tympanic membrane is 
much more vascular than the inferior half, incisions to release 
pus from a middle ear abscess (myringotomy), for example, 
are made postero-inferiorly through the membrane 
The tympanic membrane is normally translucent and 
pearly gray (Fig. B7.42B). The handle of the malleus is usu-
ally visible near the center of the membrane (the umbo). 
From the inferior end of the handle, a bright cone of light is 
reﬂ
 ected from the otoscope’s illuminator. This light reﬂ
 ex is 
visible radiating antero-inferiorly in the healthy ear.
Acute Otitis Externa
Otitis externa is an inﬂ
 ammation of the external 
acoustic meatus. The infection often develops in 
swimmers who do not dry their meatus (ear canals) 
after swimming and/or use ear drops. The inﬂ
 ammation may 
also be the result of a bacterial infection of the skin lining the 
meatus. The affected individual complains of itching and 
pain in the external ear. Pulling the auricle or applying pres-
sure on the tragus increases the pain.
Otitis Media
An earache and a bulging red tympanic membrane 
may indicate pus or ﬂ
 uid in the middle ear, a sign of 
otitis media (Fig. B7.43A). Infection of the middle 
(B)
(A)
5
4
2
3
1
FIGURE B7.42. A. Otoscopic examination. B. Normal tympanic membrane. 1, cone of light; 2, handle of malleus; 3, umbo; 4, long limb of incus; 
5, posterior limb of stapes.
(A) Otitis media
(B) Myringotomy incision
(C) Tympanostomy tube inserted
Light Reflex
Light Reflex
Light Reflex
Air-fluid Levels
Air-fluid Levels
Manubrium
Manubrium
of Malleus
of Malleus
Air-fluid
Air-fluid
Meniscus
Meniscus
Manubrium
Manubrium
of Malleus
of Malleus
Myringotomy
Myringotomy
Umbo
Umbo
Pope Tympanostomy Tube
Pope Tympanostomy Tube
Manubrium
Manubrium
of Malleus
of Malleus
Air-fluid Levels
Manubrium
of Malleus
Air-fluid
Meniscus
Manubrium
of Malleus
Myringotomy
Umbo
Pope Tympanostomy Tube
Manubrium
of Malleus
FIGURE B7.43.
