# Page 1054

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1024
Epiglottis
1st
2nd
3rd
(A) Right lateral view
Lamina
Arch 
Cricoid 
cartilage
Capsule of 
cricothyroid joint
Inferior  
horn 
Oblique line
Superior 
horn 
Thyroid 
cartilage
Triticeal 
cartilage
Greater horn 
of hyoid 
Tracheal 
cartilages
Lesser horn of hyoid 
Body of hyoid 
Thyrohyoid 
membrane
Laryngeal 
prominence
Median
cricothyroid 
ligament
Cricotracheal 
ligament
Superior horn of 
thyroid cartilage
Thyrohyoid 
membrane
(B) Posterior view
Posterior free ends 
of tracheal rings
Keratocricoid (unusual 
band of muscle)
Inferior horn of 
thyroid cartilage
Posterior 
surface
Muscular 
process
Arytenoid 
cartilage
Corniculate 
cartilage*
Cuneiform 
cartilage
Tip of greater 
horn of hyoid 
Triticeal cartilage
Epiglottic cartilage
Cricotracheal
ligament
Cricothyroid 
joint
Capsule of 
crico-arytenoid
joint
Quadrangular
membrane
*Form boundaries
  of laryngeal inlet
 
Laryngeal inlet
Ary-epiglottic
ligament*
Superior horn
Superior
thyroid
notch
Thyroid cartilage
(D) Right lateral view
Recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Capsule of
cricothyroid joint
Inferior horn
Oblique line
Trachea
Cricoid
cartilage
Cricothyroid
Median
cricothyroid
ligament
Lamina
Laryngeal
prominence
Epiglottic cartilage
(E) Superior view
Corniculate cartilage
Muscular
process
Apex 
Vocal
process
Arytenoid
cartilage
Arch of cricoid
cartilage
Thyroid cartilage
Stalk
Thyro-epiglottic ligament
Lamina of cricoid cartilage
Capsule of crico-arytenoid
joint
Rima glottidis
Lateral
cricothyroid
ligament 
Conus
elasticus
Median
cricothyroid
ligament
Vocal
ligament
1 2
3
4
7
6
5
8
5
9
5
4
10
1
2
2
(C)
Lateral view
Medial view
Posterior view
Lamina of cricoid
FIGURE 8.32. Skeleton of larynx. A. Although ﬁ
 rmly connected to it, the hyoid is not part of the larynx. The larynx extends vertically from the tip of the 
heart-shaped epiglottis to the inferior border of the cricoid cartilage. B. The thyroid cartilage shields the smaller cartilages of the larynx, and the hyoid shields 
the superior part of the epiglottic cartilage. C. Three views of an isolated arytenoid cartilage are shown. 1, Corniculate cartilage; 2, apex of arytenoid carti-
lage; 3, anterolateral surface; 4, vocal process (projects anteriorly, provides attachment for vocal ligament); 5, muscular process (projects laterally, 
for attachment of posterior and lateral crico-arytenoid muscles); 6, oblong fovea (for attachment of thyro-arytenoid muscle); 7, base; 8, medial surface; 
9, articular surface; 10, posterior surface. D. The thyroid cartilage and cricothyroid muscle are shown. This muscle produces movement at the cricothyroid 
joint. E. The epiglottic cartilage is pitted for mucous glands, and its stalk is attached by the thyro-epiglottic ligament to the angle of the thyroid cartilage 
superior to the vocal ligaments. The vocal ligament, which forms the skeleton of the vocal fold, extends from the vocal process of the arytenoid cartilage to 
the “angle” of the thyroid cartilage, and there joins its fellow inferior to the thyro-epiglottic ligament.
