# Page 1086

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1056
They pass through tiny foramina in the cribriform plate of the 
ethmoid bone, surrounded by sleeves of dura mater and arach-
noid mater, and enter the olfactory bulb in the anterior cranial 
fossa (Figs. 9.2 and 9.3). The olfactory bulb lies in contact 
with the inferior or orbital surface of the frontal lobe of the 
cerebral hemisphere. The olfactory nerve ﬁ
 bers synapse with 
mitral cells in the olfactory bulb. The axons of these second-
ary neurons form the olfactory tract. The olfactory bulbs and 
tracts are anterior extensions of the forebrain.
Each olfactory tract divides into lateral and medial olfac-
tory striae (distinct ﬁ
 ber bands). The lateral olfactory stria 
terminates in the piriform cortex of the anterior part of the 
temporal lobe, and the medial olfactory stria projects through 
the anterior commissure to contralateral olfactory structures. 
The olfactory nerves are the only cranial nerves to enter the 
cerebrum directly.
Trochlear nerve (CN IV)
Abducent nerve (CN VI)
Cavernous sinus
Superior petrosal sinus
Optic nerve (CN II)
Internal carotid artery 
and sympathetic plexus
Oculomotor nerve (CN III)
Oculomotor nerve (CN III)
(reflected anteriorly)
Anterior clinoid process
Trochlear nerve (CN IV)
Abducent nerve (CN VI)
Intermediate nerve (CN VII)
Trigeminal nerve (CN V)
Vertebral artery
Hypoglossal nerve (CN XII)
Olfactory nerves (CN I)
passing through cribiform 
plate
Anterior cranial fossa
Hypophysis
Superior view
Sigmoid sinus
Spinal cord
Occipital sinus
Spinal accessory 
nerve (CN XI)
Vagus nerve (CN X) 
Glossopharyngeal nerve
(CN IX)
Facial nerve (CN VII)
Vestibulocochlear nerve
(CN VIII)
Trigeminal ganglion
Middle meningeal artery
Olfactory
bulb
Olfactory
tract
Sphenoparietal sinus
Crista galli
Ophthalmic nerve (CN V1)
Mandibular nerve (CN V3)
Maxillary nerve (CN V2)
FIGURE 9.2. Cranial nerves in relation to internal aspect of cranial base. The tentorium cerebelli has been removed and the venous sinuses have been 
opened on the right side. The dural roof of the trigeminal cave has been removed on the left side and CN V1, CN III, and CN IV have been dissected from the 
lateral wall of the cavernous sinus.
OLFACTORY NERVE
¨The olfactory nerves (CN I) have sensory ﬁ
 bers 
 
concerned with the special sense of smell. ¨ The  
olfactory 
receptor neurons are in the olfactory  
epithelium (olfac-
tory mucosa) in the roof of the nasal cavity. ¨ The cen-
tral processes of the olfactory receptor neurons ascend 
through foramina in the cribriform plate of the ethmoid 
bone to reach the olfactory bulbs in the anterior cranial 
fossa. These nerves synapse on neurons in the bulbs, 
and the processes of these neurons  
follow the olfactory 
tracts to the primary and associated areas of the cerebral 
 
cortex.
The Bottom Line
(text continued on p. 1061)
