# Page 1064

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1034
(Figs. 8.43 and 8.44A). It extends from the soft palate to the 
superior border of the epiglottis.
Deglutition (swallowing) is the complex process that 
transfers a food bolus from the mouth through the pharynx 
and esophagus into the stomach. Solid food is masticated 
(chewed) and mixed with saliva to form a soft bolus (mass) 
that is easier to swallow. Deglutition occurs in three stages:
• Stage 1: voluntary; the bolus is compressed against the 
palate and pushed from the mouth into the oropharynx, 
mainly by movements of the muscles of the tongue and 
soft palate (Fig. 8.45A & B).
• Stage 2: involuntary and rapid; the soft palate is elevated, 
sealing off the nasopharynx from the oropharynx and 
laryngopharynx (Fig. 8.45C). The pharynx widens and 
shortens to receive the bolus of food as the suprahyoid 
muscles and longitudinal pharyngeal muscles contract, 
elevating the larynx.
• Stage 3: involuntary; sequential contraction of all three 
pharyngeal constrictor muscles creates a peristaltic ridge 
that forces the food bolus inferiorly into the esophagus 
(Fig. 8.45B-D).
The abundant lymphoid tissue in the pharynx forms an 
incomplete tonsillar ring around the superior part of the phar-
ynx (discussed later in this chapter, p. 1038). The lymphoid 
tissue is aggregated in certain regions to form masses called 
tonsils. The pharyngeal tonsil (commonly called the adenoid 
when enlarged) is in the mucous membrane of the roof and pos-
terior wall of the nasopharynx (Figs. 8.41A and 8.43). Extend-
ing inferiorly from the medial end of the pharyngotympanic 
tube is a vertical fold of mucous membrane, the salpingopha-
ryngeal fold (Figs. 8.42 and 8.43B). It covers the salpingo-
pharyngeus muscle, which opens the pharyngeal oriﬁ
 ce of the 
pharyngotympanic tube during swallowing. The collection of 
lymphoid tissue in the submucosa of the pharynx near the 
nasopharyngeal opening, or oriﬁ
 ce of the pharyngotympanic 
tube, is the tubal tonsils (Fig. 8.43B). Posterior to the torus 
of the pharyngotympanic tube and the salpingopharyngeal 
fold is a slit-like lateral projection of the pharynx, the pharyn-
geal recess, which extends laterally and posteriorly.
The oropharynx has a digestive function. It is bounded 
by the soft palate superiorly, the base of the tongue inferiorly, 
and the palatoglossal and palatopharyngeal arches  
laterally 
Soft 
palate
Palatoglossal 
arch (dotted lines)
Palatopharyngeal 
arch
Posterior
wall of
oropharynx
Dorsum of tongue
Uvula
Palatine 
tonsils
(circled)
(A) Anterior view through 
widely opened mouth
Palatoglossus
Pharyngeal recess
Tonsillar branch
of facial artery
Styloglossus
Tonsillar bed
Submandibular
gland
Glossopharyngeal
nerve (CN IX)
Hyoglossus
Superior
pharyngeal
constrictor
Palatopharyngeus
Prevertebral
fascia
Retropharyngeal
space
External palatine
vein
(B) Lateral view
Stylohyoid ligament
Middle pharyngeal
constrictor
Buccopharyngeal
fascia
Stylopharyngeus
Fold overlying pterygomandibular raphe
*
*
*
FIGURE 8.44. Oral cavity and tonsillar bed. A. The oral cavity and palatine tonsils in a young child, with the mouth wide open and the tongue protrud-
ing as far as possible. The uvula is a muscular projection from the posterior edge of the soft palate. B. In this deep dissection of the tonsillar bed, the palatine 
tonsil has been removed. The tongue is pulled anteriorly, and the inferior (lingual) attachment of the superior pharyngeal constrictor muscle is cut away.
