# Page 1009

Chapter 7  •  Head
979
Blockage of 
Pharyngotympanic Tube
The pharyngotympanic tube forms a route for an 
infection to pass from the nasopharynx to the tym-
panic cavity. This tube is easily blocked by swelling 
of its mucous membrane, even as a result of mild infections 
(e.g., a cold), because the walls of its cartilaginous part are 
normally already in apposition. When the pharyngotympanic 
tube is occluded, residual air in the tympanic cavity is usually 
absorbed into the mucosal blood vessels, resulting in lower 
pressure in the tympanic cavity, retraction of the tympanic 
membrane, and interference with its free movement. Finally, 
hearing is affected.
Paralysis of Stapedius
The tympanic muscles have a protective action in 
that they dampen large vibrations of the tympanic 
membrane resulting from loud noises. Paralysis of 
the stapedius (e.g., resulting from a lesion of the facial nerve) 
is associated with excessive acuteness of hearing, called 
hyperacusis or hyperacusia. This condition results from 
uninhibited movements of the stapes.
Motion Sickness
The maculae of the membranous labyrinth are pri-
marily static organs, which have small dense parti-
cles (otoliths) embedded among hair cells. Under 
the inﬂ
 uence of gravity, the otoliths cause bending of the hair 
cells, which stimulate the vestibular nerve, and provide 
awareness of the position of the head in space; the hairs also 
respond to quick tilting movements and to linear accelera-
tion and deceleration. Motion sickness results from discor-
dance between vestibular and visual stimulation.
Dizziness and Hearing Loss
Injuries of the peripheral auditory system cause three 
major symptoms: hearing loss (usually conductive hear-
ing loss), vertigo (dizziness) when the injury involves 
the semicircular ducts, and tinnitus (buzzing or ringing) when the 
injury is localized in the cochlear duct. Tinnitus and hearing loss 
may result from lesions anywhere in the peripheral or central 
auditory pathways. The two types of hearing loss are as follows:
• Conductive hearing loss: resulting from anything in the 
external or middle ear that interferes with conduction of 
sound or movement of the oval or round windows. Peo-
ple with this type of hearing loss often speak with a soft 
voice because, to them, their own voices sound louder 
than background sounds. This type of hearing loss may be 
improved surgically or by use of a hearing aid device.
• Sensorineural hearing loss: resulting from defects in the 
pathway from cochlea to brain: defects of the cochlea, 
cochlear nerve, brainstem, or cortical connections. Cochlear 
implants are one approach employed to restore sound per-
ception when the hair cells of the spiral organ have been 
damaged (Fig. B7.45). Sound received by a small exter-
nal microphone are transmitted to an implanted receiver 
that sends electrical impulses to the cochlea, stimulating 
the cochlear nerve. Hearing remains relatively crude but 
enables perception of rhythm and intensity of sounds.
Ménière Syndrome
Ménière syndrome is related to excess endolymph 
 
production or blockage of the endolymphatic duct 
(Fig. 7.113B) and is characterized by recurrent attacks 
of tinnitus, hearing loss, and vertigo. These symptoms are 
accompanied by a sense of pressure in the ear, distortion of 
(Fig. B7.43B). This incision also avoids injury to the chorda 
tympani nerve and auditory ossicles. In persons with chronic 
middle ear infections, myringotomy may be followed by 
insertion of tympanostomy or pressure-equalization (PE) 
tubes in the incision to enable drainage of effusion and ven-
tilation of pressure (Fig. B7.43C).
Mastoiditis
Infections of the mastoid antrum and mastoid 
cells (mastoiditis) result from a middle ear infec-
tion that causes inflammation of the mastoid pro-
cess (Fig. B7.44). Infections may spread superiorly into 
the middle cranial fossa through the petrosquamous fis-
sure in children and cause osteomyelitis (bone infection) 
of the tegmen tympani. Since the advent of antibiotics, 
mastoiditis is uncommon. During operations for mastoid-
itis, surgeons are conscious of the course of the facial 
nerve to avoid injuring it. One point of access to the tym-
panic cavity is through the mastoid antrum. In children, 
only a thin plate of bone must be removed from the lat-
eral wall of the antrum to expose the tympanic cavity. In 
adults, bone must be penetrated for 15 mm or more. At 
present, most mastoidectomies are  
endaural (i.e., per-
formed through the posterior wall of the external acoustic 
meatus).
FIGURE B7.44. Mastoiditis (ruptured retro-auricular abscess).
