# Page 1058

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1028
Rima
glottidis
(A) Lateral view
      Cricothyroid
(B) Superior view
      Thyro-arytenoid
(E) Superior view
      Transverse arytenoid
(F) Superior view
      Oblique arytenoid
(C) Superior view
      Posterior crico-arytenoid
(D) Superior view
      Lateral crico-arytenoid
Vocalis
muscles
FIGURE 8.38. Muscles of the larynx.
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Main Action(s)
Cricothyroid
Anterolateral part of cricoid 
cartilage
Inferior margin and 
inferior horn of thyroid 
cartilage
External laryngeal nerve 
(from CN X)
Stretches and tenses vocal 
ligament 
Thyro-arytenoida
Lower half of posterior aspect 
of angle of thyroid laminae and 
cricothyroid ligament 
 
Anterolateral 
arytenoid surface
 
Inferior laryngeal nerve 
(terminal part of recurrent 
laryngeal nerve, from 
CN X – see Fig. 8.37)
Relaxes vocal ligament 
Posterior 
crico-arytenoid
Posterior surface of lamina of 
cricoid cartilage 
 
Vocal process of 
arytenoid cartilage
Abducts vocal folds 
Lateral crico-
arytenoid
Arch of cricoid cartilage 
Adducts vocal folds (inter-
ligamentous portion) 
Transverse 
and oblique 
arytenoidsb
One arytenoid cartilage 
 
Contralateral 
arytenoid cartilage
Adduct arytenoid cartilages 
(adducting intercartilaginous 
portion of vocal folds, closing 
posterior rima glottidis)
Vocalisc
Lateral surface of vocal pro-
cess of aryte 
noid cartilage
 
Ipsilateral vocal 
ligament
Relaxes posterior vocal 
ligament while maintaining 
(or increasing) tension of 
anterior part
TABLE 8.5. MUSCLES OF LARYNX
aSuperior ﬁ
 bers of the thyro-arytenoid muscles pass into the ary-epiglottic fold, and some of them reach the epiglottic cartilage. These ﬁ
 bers constitute the thyro-epiglottic 
muscle, which widens the laryngeal inlet.
bSome ﬁ
 bers of the oblique arytenoid muscles continue as ary-epiglottic muscles (Fig. 8.39).
cThis slender muscle slip lies medial to and is composed of ﬁ
 bers ﬁ
 ner than those of the thyro-arytenoid muscle.
