# Page 1015

Chapter 8  •  Neck
985
BONES OF NECK
Cervical Pain
Cervical pain (neck pain) has several causes, includ-
ing inﬂ
 amed lymph nodes, muscle strain, and pro-
truding intervertebral (IV) discs. Enlarged cervical 
lymph nodes may indicate a malignant tumor in the head; 
however, the primary cancer may be in the thorax or abdomen 
because the neck connects the head to the trunk (e.g., lung 
cancer may metastasize through the neck to the cranium). 
Most chronic cervical pain is caused by bony abnormalities 
(e.g., cervical osteoarthritis) or by trauma. Cervical pain is usu-
ally affected by movement of the head and neck, and it may be 
exaggerated during coughing or sneezing, for example.
Injuries of Cervical Vertebral Column
Fractures and dislocations of the cervical verte-
bra may injure the spinal cord and/or the verte-
bral arteries and sympathetic plexuses passing 
through the foramina transversaria. See the blue boxes 
“Dislocation of Cervical Vertebrae” (p. 457), “Fracture 
and Dis 
location of Atlas” (p. 458), and “Fracture and 
Dislocation of Axis” (p. 459).
Fracture of Hyoid Bone
Fracture of the hyoid (or of the styloid processes 
of the temporal bone; see Chapter 7), occurs in 
people who are manually strangled by compres-
sion of the throat. This results in depression of the body of 
the hyoid onto the thyroid cartilage. Inability to elevate 
the hyoid and move it anteriorly beneath the tongue 
makes swallowing and maintenance of the separation of 
the alimentary and respiratory tracts difﬁ
 cult and may 
result in aspiration pneumonia.
FASCIA OF NECK
Structures in the neck are surrounded by a layer of subcuta-
neous tissue (superﬁ
 cial fascia) and are compartmentalized 
by layers of deep cervical fascia. The fascial planes determine 
the direction an infection may spread in the neck.
Cervical Subcutaneous Tissue 
and Platysma
The cervical subcutaneous tissue (superﬁ
 cial cervical fas-
cia) is a layer of fatty connective tissue that lies between the 
dermis of the skin and the investing layer of deep cervical 
fascia (Fig. 8.4A). The cervical subcutaneous tissue is usually 
thinner than in other regions, especially anteriorly. It contains 
cutaneous nerves, blood and lymphatic vessels, superﬁ
 cial 
lymph nodes, and variable amounts of fat.  
Anterolaterally, it 
contains the platysma (Fig. 8.4B).
PLATYSMA
The platysma (G. ﬂ
 at plate) is a broad, thin sheet of muscle 
in the subcutaneous tissue of the neck (Figs. 8.4B, 8.5, and 
Fig. 8.7A). Like other facial and scalp muscles, the platysma 
develops from a continuous sheet of musculature derived 
from mesenchyme in the 2nd pharyngeal arch of the embryo 
and is supplied by branches of the facial nerve, CN VII. The 
external jugular vein (EJV), descending from the angle of 
the mandible to the middle of the clavicle (Fig. 8.1), and the 
main cutaneous nerves of the neck are deep to the platysma.
The platysma covers the anterolateral aspect of the neck. Its 
ﬁ
 bers arise in the deep fascia covering the superior parts of the 
deltoid and pectoralis major muscles and sweep superomedi-
ally over the clavicle to the inferior border of the mandible. The 
anterior borders of the two muscles decussate over the chin and 
blend with the facial muscles. Inferiorly, the ﬁ
 bers diverge, leav-
ing a gap anterior to the larynx and trachea (Fig. 8.5). Much 
variation exists in terms of the continuity (completeness) of 
this muscular sheet, which often occurs as isolated slips. The 
 
platysma is supplied by the cervical branch of CN VII.
BONES OF NECK
Cervical vertebrae: The neck is a movable “connect-
ing stalk” with a segmented axial skeleton. ¨ The stacked, 
 
centrally placed vertebral bodies support the head. ¨ The IV 
articulations—especially the craniovertebral joints at its supe-
rior end—provide the ﬂ
 exibility necessary to allow positioning 
of the head to maximize the use of its sensory organs. ¨ Mul-
tiple processes of the vertebrae provide both the attachments 
and the leverage necessary to move the head into and maintain 
those positions. ¨ The foramina of the cervical vertebrae pro-
vide protective passage for the spinal cord and the vertebral 
arteries that nourish the bones and are a major component of 
the brain’s blood supply. ¨ The vertebrae provide little protec-
tion for other structures of the neck.
Hyoid bone: Unique in terms of its isolation from the rest 
of the skeleton, the U-shaped hyoid is suspended between the 
body of the mandible superiorly and the manubrium of the 
sternum inferiorly. ¨ The hyoid provides a movable base for 
the tongue and attachment for the middle part of the  
pharynx. 
¨ The hyoid also maintains the patency of the pharynx, 
required for swallowing and respiration.
The Bottom Line
