# Page 1077

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1047
males. The anteroposterior diameter of the rima glottidis 
almost doubles its prepubescent measurement in males, 
the vocal folds lengthening and thickening proportion-
ately and abruptly. This growth accounts for the voice 
changes that occur in males: The pitch typically becomes 
an octave lower.
The pitch of the voice of eunuchs, males whose testes 
have not developed (agonadal males) or have been surgically 
removed (e.g., cancerous testes), does not become lower 
without administration of male hormones. The thyroid, cri-
coid, and most of the arytenoid cartilages often ossify as age 
advances, commencing at approximately 25 years of age in 
the thyroid cartilage. By 65 years of age, the cartilages are 
frequently visible in radiographs.
Foreign Bodies in Laryngopharynx
When food passes through the laryngopharynx dur-
ing swallowing, some of it enters the piriform fos-
sae. Foreign bodies (e.g., a chicken bone or ﬁ
 shbone) 
entering the pharynx may lodge in this recess. If the object is 
sharp, it may pierce the mucous membrane and injure the 
internal laryngeal nerve.
The superior laryngeal nerve and its internal laryngeal 
branch are also vulnerable to injury during removal of the 
object if the instrument used to remove the foreign body 
accidentally pierces the mucous membrane. Injury to these 
nerves may result in anesthesia of the laryngeal mucous 
membrane as far inferiorly as the vocal folds. Young chil-
dren swallow a variety of objects, most of which reach the 
stomach and pass through the alimentary tract without dif-
ﬁ
 culty. In some cases, the foreign body stops at the inferior 
end of the laryngopharynx, its narrowest part. A medical 
image such as a radiograph or a CT scan will reveal the 
presence of a radiopaque foreign body. Foreign bodies in 
the pharynx are often removed under direct vision through 
a pharyngoscope.
Sinus Tract from Piriform Fossa
Although uncommon, a sinus tract may pass from 
the piriform fossa to the thyroid gland, becoming a 
potential site for recurring thyroiditis (inﬂ
 amma-
tion of the thyroid gland). This sinus tract apparently devel-
ops from a remnant of the thyroglossal duct that adheres to 
the developing laryngopharynx. Removal of this sinus tract 
essentially involves a partial thyroidectomy because the piri-
form fossa lies deep to the superior pole of the gland (Scher 
and Richtsmeier, 1994).
Tonsillectomy
Tonsillectomy (removal of the tonsils) is per-
formed by dissecting the palatine tonsil from the 
tonsillar bed or by a guillotine or snare operation. 
Each procedure involves removal of the tonsil and 
 
surrounding connective tissue (Fig. B8.14). Because of 
the rich blood supply of the tonsil, bleeding commonly 
arises from the large external palatine vein (Fig. 8.44B) 
or, less commonly, from the tonsillar artery or other arte-
rial twigs. The glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) accom-
panies the tonsillar artery on the lateral wall of the 
pharynx. Because this wall is thin, the nerve is vulnerable 
to injury. The internal carotid artery is especially vulner-
able when it is tortuous and lies directly lateral to the 
 
tonsil (Fig. 8.46B).
Membranous
lateral wall of
pharyngotympanic
tube
Tensor
veli palatini
Cartilage of
pharyngotympanic
tube
Levator
veli palatini
Tonsillar branch
of ascending
palatine artery
Tonsillar branch
of facial artery  
Salpingo-
pharyngeus
Ligature retracting
palatine tonsil
Tonsillar bed
FIGURE B8.14. Tonsillectomy.
