# Page 1048

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1018
septa deeply into the gland. Dense connective tissue attaches 
the capsule to the cricoid cartilage and superior tracheal rings. 
External to the capsule is a loose sheath formed by the visceral 
portion of the pretracheal layer of deep cervical fascia.
Arteries of Thyroid Gland. The highly vascular thy-
roid gland is supplied by the superior and inferior thyroid 
arteries (Figs. 8.26B and 8.27). These vessels lie between 
the ﬁ
 brous capsule and the loose fascial sheath. Usually the 
ﬁ
 rst branches of the external carotid arteries, the superior 
thyroid arteries, descend to the superior poles of the gland, 
pierce the pretracheal layer of deep cervical fascia, and 
divide into anterior and posterior branches supplying mainly 
the anterosuperior aspect of the gland.
The inferior thyroid arteries, the largest branches of 
the thyro 
cervical trunks arising from the subclavian arter-
ies, run superomedially posterior to the carotid sheaths to 
reach the posterior aspect of the thyroid gland. They divide 
into several branches that pierce the pretracheal layer of the 
deep cervical fascia and supply the posteroinferior aspect, 
including the inferior poles of the gland. The right and 
left superior and inferior thyroid arteries anastomose exten-
sively within the gland, ensuring its supply while providing 
potential collateral circulation between the subclavian and 
external carotid arteries.
In approximately 10% of people, a small, unpaired thy-
roid ima artery (L. arteria thyroidea ima) arises from the 
brachiocephalic trunk (see the blue box “Thyroid Ima Artery” 
on p. 1040); however, it may arise from the arch of the aorta 
or from the right common carotid, subclavian, or internal 
thoracic arteries. When present, this small artery ascends on 
the anterior surface of the trachea, supplying small branches 
to it. The artery then continues to the isthmus of the thyroid 
gland, where it divides and supplies it.
VISCERA OF NECK
The cervical viscera are disposed in three layers, named for 
their primary function (Fig. 8.26). Superﬁ
 cial to deep, they 
are the:
1. Endocrine layer: the thyroid and parathyroid glands.
2. Respiratory layer: the larynx and trachea.
3. Alimentary layer: the pharynx and esophagus.
Endocrine Layer of Cervical Viscera
The viscera of the endocrine layer are part of the body’s 
endocrine system of ductless, hormone-secreting glands. 
The thyroid gland is the body’s largest endocrine gland. 
It produces thyroid hormone, which controls the rate of 
metabolism, and calcitonin, a hormone controlling calcium 
metabolism. The thyroid gland affects all areas of the body 
except itself and the spleen, testes, and uterus. The hormone 
produced by the parathyroid glands, parathormone (PTH), 
controls the metabolism of phosphorus and calcium in the 
blood. The parathyroid glands target the skeleton, kidneys, 
and intestine.
THYROID GLAND
The thyroid gland lies deep to the sternothyroid and ster-
nohyoid muscles, located anteriorly in the neck at the level of 
the C5–T1 vertebrae (Fig. 8.26). It consists primarily of right 
and left lobes, anterolateral to the larynx and trachea. A rela-
tively thin isthmus unites the lobes over the trachea, usually 
anterior to the second and third tracheal rings. The thyroid 
gland is surrounded by a thin ﬁ
 brous capsule, which sends 
DEEP STRUCTURES OF NECK
Prevertebral muscles: The prevertebral muscles, deep to the 
prevertebral layer of deep cervical fascia, are divided into ante-
rior and lateral vertebral muscles by the neurovascular plane of 
the cervical and brachial plexuses and subclavian artery. ¨ The 
anterior vertebral muscles ﬂ
 ex the head and neck; however, this 
movement is normally produced by gravity in conjunction with 
eccentric contraction of the extensors of the neck. ¨ Thus, the 
anterior vertebral muscles are called into action mainly when 
this movement is performed against resis 
tance, probably initi-
ating the movement while the strength of the movement is pro-
duced by the SCM. ¨ The lateral vertebral muscles laterally ﬂ
 ex 
the neck, participate in rotation of the neck, and ﬁ
 x or elevate 
the superiormost ribs during forced inspiration.
Root of the neck: The branches of the arch of the aorta 
bifurcate and/or traverse the root of the neck, with the branches 
of the subclavian artery arising here also. ¨ The internal jugular 
and subclavian veins converge at the root of the neck to form the 
brachiocephalic veins. ¨ The major lymphatic trunks (right lym-
phatic duct and thoracic duct) enter the venous angles formed by 
the convergence of these veins. ¨ The phrenic and vagus nerves 
enter the thorax by passing anterior to the subclavian arteries 
and posterior to the brachio 
cephalic veins. ¨ The sympathetic 
trunks and recurrent laryngeal nerves traverse the root of the 
neck posterior to the arteries, as do the visceral structures (tra-
chea and esophagus). ¨ The cervical portion of the sympathetic 
trunks include three cervical sympathetic ganglia (inferior, mid-
dle, and superior), in which presynaptic ﬁ
 bers from the superior 
thoracic spinal cord synapse with postsynaptic neurons. ¨ These 
neurons send ﬁ
 bers to the cervical spinal nerves, via gray rami 
communicantes; to the head and viscera of the neck, via cephalic 
arterial branches and peri-arterial plexuses; and to the thoracic 
viscera, via cardiac (cardiopulmonary splanchnic) nerves.
The Bottom Line
