# Page 1100

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1070
Parasympathetic fibers of the
chorda tympani synapse in the
submandibular ganglion;
postsynaptic fibers follow
arteries to glands.
Postsynaptic parasympathetic 
fibers from this ganglion 
innervate the lacrimal gland via 
the zygomatic branch of CN V2 
and the lacrimal nerve (branch of 
CN V1).
Parasympathetic fibers from the 
nerve of pterygoid canal in the 
pterygopalatine fossa synapse in 
the pterygopalatine ganglion.
Nerve of pterygoid canal travels 
through the pterygoid canal and 
enters the pterygopalatine fossa.
Greater petrosal nerve joins the 
deep petrosal nerve (sympathetic) 
at the foramen lacerum to form 
the nerve of the pterygoid canal.
(A) Parasympathetic (visceral motor) 
to lacrimal gland
(B) Parasympathetic (visceral motor) to 
submandibular and sublingual glands
Greater petrosal nerve arises 
from CN VII at the geniculate 
ganglion and emerges from the 
superior surface of the petrous 
part of the temporal bone to 
enter the middle cranial fossa.
The chorda tympani crosses the 
tympanic cavity medial to the 
handle of malleus.
The chorda tympani branch arises 
from CN VII just superior to 
stylomastoid foramen.
The chorda tympani passes
through the petrotympanic fissure
between the tympanic and the
petrous parts of the temporal
bone to join the lingual nerve
(CN V3) in the infratemporal fossa.
FIGURE 9.11. Parasympathetic innervation involving CN VII. A. Innervation of the lacrimal gland. B. Innervation of the submandibular and sublingual 
glands.
FACIAL NERVE
¨ The facial nerves (CN VII) supply motor ﬁ
 bers to the sta-
pedius, posterior belly of the digastric, stylohyoid, facial, and 
scalp muscles. ¨ They also supply presynaptic parasympa-
thetic ﬁ
 bers via the intermediate nerve (smaller root of  
CN VII) destined for the pterygopalatine and submandibular 
ganglia via the greater petrosal nerve and chorda tympani, 
respectively. ¨ CN VII is sensory to some skin of the external 
acoustic meatus and, via the intermediate nerve, is sensory to 
taste from the anterior two thirds of the tongue and the soft 
palate. ¨ CN VII originates from the posterior border of the 
pons and runs through the internal acoustic meatus and facial 
canal in the petrous part of the temporal bone. ¨ CN VII 
exits via the stylomastoid foramen; its main trunk forms the 
 
intraparotid nerve plexus.
The Bottom Line
