# Page 1044

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1014
ARTERIES IN ROOT OF NECK
The brachiocephalic trunk is covered anteriorly by the right 
sternohyoid and sternothyroid muscles; it is the largest 
branch of the arch of the aorta (Fig. 8.24). It arises in the mid-
line from the beginning of the arch of the aorta, posterior to 
the manubrium. It passes superolaterally to the right where 
it divides into the right common carotid and right subclavian 
arteries posterior to the sternoclavicular (SC) joint. The bra-
chiocephalic trunk usually has no preterminal branches.
structures going from the thorax to the head or upper limb 
and vice versa (see Fig. 1.7, p. 79). The inferior boundary of 
the root of the neck is the superior thoracic aperture, formed 
laterally by the 1st pair of ribs and their costal cartilages, 
anteriorly by the manubrium of the sternum, and posteriorly 
by the body of T1 vertebra. The visceral structures in the 
root of the neck are described in “Viscera of Neck” (p. 1018). 
Only the neurovascular elements of the root of the neck are 
described here.
Internal thoracic artery
Subclavian artery
Phrenic nerve
Superior cervical ganglion
Inferior cervical ganglion*
Ascending cervical artery
Dorsal scapular artery
Thyrocervical trunk
Vertebral artery (cut)
Vertebral artery (cut)
Inferior thyroid artery
Suprascapular artery
Sympathetic trunk
Longus capitis
Great auricular nerve (C2 and C3)
Lesser occipital nerve (C2)
Supraclavicular nerve (C3 and C4)
Transverse cervical nerve (C2 and C3)
Middle cervical ganglion
Ansa subclavia
Prevertebral layer of deep cervical fascia
C1 nerve
Common carotid artery
Hypoglossal nerve (CN XII)
Levator scapulae
Mastoid process
Jugular process
Rectus capitis lateralis
Rectus capitis anterior
Longus capitis
Cardiac nerves
(cardiothoracic
splanchnic nerves)
Anterior
longitudinal
ligament
Prevertebral layer of
deep cervical fascia (cut)
Longus colli
Carotid tubercle of
transverse process of C6
Posterior scalene
Middle scalene
Anterior scalene
1st rib
Basilar part of occipital bone
(Basi-occiput)
Transverse process of atlas (C1)
(B) Anterior view
Lateral mass of atlas (C1)
Typically combines with 1st thoracic ganglion
to form cervicothoracic (stellate) ganglion
*
FIGURE 8.24. (Continued) Root of neck and prevertebral region. B. In this dissection of the prevertebral region and root of the neck, the prevertebral 
layer of the deep cervical fascia and the arteries and nerves have been removed from the right side; the longus capitis muscle has been excised on the right 
side. The cervical plexus of nerves, arising from the anterior rami of C1–C4; the brachial plexus of nerves, arising from the anterior rami of C5–C8 and T1; 
and branches of the subclavian artery are visible on the left side.
