# Page 1007

Chapter 7  •  Head
977
EAR
External Ear Injury
Bleeding within the auricle resulting from trauma 
may produce an auricular hematoma. A localized 
collection of blood forms between the perichon-
drium and auricular cartilage, causing distortion of the con-
tours of the auricle. As the hematoma enlarges, it compromises 
the blood supply to the cartilage. If untreated (e.g., by aspira-
tion of blood), ﬁ
 brosis (formation of ﬁ
 brous tissue) develops 
in the overlying skin, forming a deformed auricle (e.g., the 
cauliﬂ
 ower or boxer’s ear of some professional boxers and 
wrestlers).
Otoscopic Examination
Examination of the external acoustic meatus and tym-
panic membrane begins by straightening the meatus. 
In adults, the helix is grasped and pulled posterosupe-
riorly (up, out, and back). These movements reduce the curva-
ture of the external acoustic meatus, facilitating insertion of the 
otoscope (Fig. B7.42A). The meatus is relatively short in infants; 
therefore, extra care must be exercised to prevent injury to the 
tympanic membrane. The meatus is straightened in infants by 
pulling the auricle inferoposteriorly (down and back). The 
examination also provides a clue to tenderness, which can indi-
cate inﬂ
 ammation of the auricle and/or the meatus.
opening is in the posteromedial part of this bone, in line with 
the external acoustic meatus. The internal acoustic meatus is 
closed laterally by a thin, perforated plate of bone that sepa-
rates it from the internal ear. Through this plate pass the facial 
nerve (CN VII), the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII) and 
its divisions, and blood vessels. The vestibulocochlear nerve 
divides near the lateral end of the internal acoustic meatus into 
two parts: a cochlear nerve and a vestibular nerve (Fig. 7.119).
which ascend and descend in the surrounding scalae ves-
tibuli and tympani.
INTERNAL ACOUSTIC MEATUS
The internal acoustic meatus is a narrow canal that runs 
laterally for approximately 1 cm within the petrous part of the 
temporal bone (Fig. 7.117A). The internal acoustic meatus 
Helicotrema
Cochlear nerve
(CN VIII)
Scala vestibuli
Scala tympani
Contain
perilymph
Tectorial
membrane
Cochlear duct (contains
spiral organ and
endolymph)
Pharyngotympanic tube
Secondary
tympanic
membrane
in round
window
External
acoustic
meatus
Tympanic
membrane
Malleus
Incus
Stapes
Base plate
of stapes in
oval window
1
3
4
5
5
6
6
7
2
FIGURE 7.120. Sound transmission through the ear. The cochlea is depicted schematically as if consisting of a single coil to demonstrate the transmis-
sion of sound stimuli through the ear. 1, Sound waves entering the external ear strike the tympanic membrane, causing it to vibrate. 2, Vibrations initiated 
at the tympanic membrane are transmitted through the ossicles of the middle ear and their articulations. 3, The base of the stapes vibrates with increased 
strength and decreased amplitude in the oval window. 4, Vibrations of the base of the stapes create pressure waves in the perilymph of the scala vestibuli. 
5, Pressure waves in the scala vestibuli cause displacement of the basilar membrane of the cochlear duct. Short waves (high pitch) cause displacement near 
the oval window; longer waves (low pitch) cause more distant displacement, nearer to the helicotrema at the apex of the cochlea. Movement of the basilar 
membrane bends the hair cells of the spiral organ. Neurotransmitter is released, stimulating action potentials conveyed by the cochlear nerve to the brain. 6, 
Vibrations are transferred across the cochlear duct to the perilymph of the scala tympani. 7, Pressure waves in the perilymph are dissipated (dampened) by 
the secondary tympanic membrane at the round window into the air of the tympanic cavity.
