# Page 1072

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1042
usually to the left of the median plane; the isthmus may be 
incomplete or absent (Fig. B8.8). A band of connective tis-
sue, often containing accessory thyroid tissue, may continue 
from the apex of the pyramidal lobe to the hyoid. This narrow 
lobe and connective tissue band develop from remnants of 
the epithelium and connective tissue of the thyroglossal duct.
Enlargement of Thyroid Gland
A non-neoplastic, noninﬂ
 ammatory enlargement of 
the thyroid gland, other than the variable enlarge-
ment that may occur during menstruation and preg-
nancy, is called a goiter, which results from a lack of iodine. It 
is common in parts of the world where the soil and water are 
deﬁ
 cient in iodine. The enlarged gland causes a swelling in the 
neck that may compress the trachea, esophagus, and recur-
rent laryngeal nerves (Fig. B8.9). When the gland enlarges, it 
may do so anteriorly, posteriorly, inferiorly, or laterally. It can-
not move superiorly because of the superior attachments of 
the overlying sternothyroid and sternohyoid muscles 
(Table 8.3). Substernal extension of a goiter is also common.
of the thyroglossal duct (e.g., in the thymus inferior to the 
thyroid gland or in the thorax). An accessory thyroid gland 
may develop in the neck lateral to the thyroid cartilage; it 
usually lies on the thyrohyoid muscle (Fig. 8.28). Although 
the accessory gland may be functional, it is often of insufﬁ
 -
cient size to maintain normal function if the thyroid gland is 
removed.
Pyramidal Lobe of Thyroid Gland
Approximately 50% of thyroid glands have a pyra-
midal lobe. This lobe, which varies in size, extends 
superiorly from the isthmus of the thyroid gland, 
(A)
(B)
ATG
FIGURE B8.7. Aberrant thyroid glandular tissue. A. Aberrant tissue 
inferior to hyoid bone. B. Radioisotope scan demonstrating presence of 
aberrant thyroid glandular tissue (ATG). Glandular tissue in the typical 
position is present in irregularly shaped masses making up small tapering 
lobes and a large isthmus.
Absence of isthmus
Pyramidal lobe
Pyramidal lobe
(remnant of
thyroglossal duct)
Accessory
thyroid tissue
Incomplete isthmus
Hyoid
Connective tissue
band
FIGURE B8.8.
