# Page 1103

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1073
VAGUS NERVE (CN X)
Functions: Sensory—somatic (general) sensory, special 
sensory (taste), visceral sensory. Motor—somatic (brachial) 
motor and visceral (parasympathetic) motor.
• Somatic (general) sensory from the inferior pharynx, and 
larynx.
• Visceral sensory from the thoracic and abdominal organs.
• Taste and somatic (general) sensation from the root of the 
tongue and taste buds on the epiglottis. Branches of the 
internal laryngeal nerve (a branch of CN X) supply a small 
area, mostly somatic (general) sensory, but also some spe-
cial sensation (taste).
• Somatic (branchial) motor to the soft palate; pharynx; 
intrinsic laryngeal muscles (phonation); and a nominal 
extrinsic tongue muscle, the palatoglossus, which is 
actually a palatine muscle based on its derivation and 
innervation.
• Proprioceptive to the muscles listed above.
• Visceral (parasympathetic) motor to thoracic and abdomi-
nal viscera.
Nuclei: Sensory—sensory nucleus of the trigeminal nerve 
(somatic sensory) and nuclei of the solitary tract (taste and 
visceral sensory). Motor—nucleus ambiguus (somatic [bran-
chial] motor) and dorsal vagal nucleus (visceral [parasym-
pathetic] motor) (Fig. 9.5).
Nerve to posterior wall
of pharyngeal plexus 
Nerve to
pharyngotympanic tube
Pharyngeal branches
(B)
Branches to
stylopharyngeus
Carotid body
and sinus
Carotid branch
Nerve to palatine tonsil
Posterior third of tongue
Glossopharyngeal 
nerve (CN IX) traversing
jugular foramen with
internal jugular vein
Lesser petrosal nerve
Internal jugular vein
(A)
Lesser petrosal nerve
Mastoid cells
Auriculotemporal 
nerve (CN V3)
Tympanic nerve (CN IX)
Tympanic plexus in 
middle ear
Trigeminal ganglion
Otic ganglion
Mandibular nerve (CN V3)
Parotid gland
and duct
Secretomotor branch
to parotid gland
Tympanic nerve
Inferior pharyngeal
constrictor  
Glossopharyngeal
nerve (CN IX)
FIGURE 9.13. Distribution of glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX). A. CN IX is motor to one striated pharyngeal muscle, the stylopharyngeus. It also carries 
sensory ﬁ
 bers from the carotid body and carotid sinus, conveying information about blood pressure and gas levels as well as somatic (general) sensation 
from the internal ear, pharynx, and fauces and taste from the posterior tongue. B. The parasympathetic component of CN IX supplies presynaptic secretory 
ﬁ
 bers to the otic ganglion; postsynaptic ﬁ
 bers pass to the parotid gland via the auriculotemporal nerve (CN V3).
