# Page 1113

1083
INTRODUCTION
Bergman RA, Thompson SA, Aﬁ
 ﬁ
  AK, Saadeh FA: Compendium of Human 
Anatomic Variation: Text, Atlas, and World Literature. Baltimore, 
Urban & Schwarzenberg, 1988. This useful source has been updated 
and is available from the Virtual Hospital’s Web site Illustrated Encyclo-
pedia of Human Anatomic Variation at www.vh.org/Providers/
Textbooks/AnatomicVariants/AnatomyHP.html, 2008.
Federative Committee on Anatomical Terminology: Terminologia Anatom-
ica: International Anatomical Nomenclature. Stuttgart, Thieme, 1998.
Haines DE (ed): Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Appli-
cations, 3rd ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone (Elsevier), 2006.
Hutchins JB, Naftel JP, Ard MD: The cell biology of neurons and glia.  
In Haines DE (ed): Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th ed. Saunders/
Elsevier, 2012.
Keegan JJ, Garrett FD: The segmental distribution of the cutaneous 
nerves in the limbs of man. Anat Rec 102:409, 1948.
Kliegman RM, Stanton BMD, St. Geme J, Schor NF and Behrman RE 
(eds): Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 19th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/
Elsevier, 2011.
Kumar V, Abbas AK, Fausto N, Aster J: Robbins and Cotran Pathologic 
Basis of Disease, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2009.
Maklad A, Quinn T, Fritsch B: Intracranial distribution of the sympathetic 
system in mice: DiI tracing and immunocytochemical labeling. Anat 
Rec 263:99, 2001.
Marieb E and Hoehn K: Human Anatomy and Physiology, 9th ed. Menlo 
Park, CA, Benjamin/Cummings, 2012.
Moore KL, Persaud TVN and Torchia MG: The Developing Human: Clini-
cally Oriented Embryology, 9th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2012.
O’Rahilly R: Making planes plain. Clin Anat 10:129, 1997.
Ross MH, Pawlina W: Histology. A Text and Atlas, 6th ed. Baltimore, 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011.
Salter RB: Textbook of Disorders and Injuries of the Musculoskeletal 
System, 3rd ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1998.
Stedman’s Medical Dictionary, 28th ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins, 2006.
Swartz MH: Textbook of Physical Diagnosis, History and Examination, 
6th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2009.
Willis MC: Medical Terminology: The Language of Health Care, 2nd ed. 
Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
Wilson-Pauwels L, Stewart PA, Akesson E: Autonomic Nerves: Basic 
 
Science, Clinical Aspects, Case Studies. Hamilton, ON, Decker, 1997.
CHAPTER 1
Bergman RA, Thompson SA, Aﬁ
 ﬁ
  AK, Saadeh FA: Compendium of 
Human Anatomic Variation: Text, Atlas, and World Literature. 
Baltimore, Urban & Schwarzenberg, 1988. This useful source has been 
updated and is available from the Virtual Hospital’s Web site Illustrated 
Encyclopedia of Human Anatomic Variation at www.vh.org/
Providers/Textbooks/AnatomicVariants/AnatomyHP.html (accessed 
May 2004).
Goroll AH and Mulley AG: Primary Care Medicine: Ofﬁ
 ce Evaluation 
and Management of the Adult Patient, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
 
Williams & Wilkins, 2009.
Greene MF, Creasy RK, Resnik R, Iams JD, Lockwood CJ and Moore T: 
Creasy and Resnik’s Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 6th ed. Philadelphia, 
Saunders/Elsevier, 2008.
Hardy SGP, Naftel JP: Viscerosensory pathways. In Haines DE (ed): Funda-
mental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications, 3rd ed. 
New York, Churchill Livingstone (Elsevier), 2006.
Kliegman RM, Stanton BMD, St. Geme J, Schor NF and Behrman RE 
(eds): Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 19th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/
Elsevier, 2011.
Kumar V, Abbas AK, Aster JC, Fausto N: Robbins & Cotran Pathological 
Basis of Disease, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2009.
Marx J, Hockberger R, and Walls R: Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Con-
cepts and Clinical Practice, 7th ed. St. Louis, Mosby (Elsevier), 2009.
Moore KL, Persaud TVN and Torchia MG: The Developing Human. Clini-
cally Oriented Embryology, 9th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2012.
Rowland LP, Pedley TA (ed): Merritt’s Neurology, 12th ed. Baltimore, 
 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009.
Shields TW, LoCicero J, Reed CE, and Feins RH: General Thoracic Sur-
gery, Vol. 1. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009.
Slaby FJ, McCune SK, Summers RW: Gross Anatomy in the Practice of 
Medicine. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1994.
Standring S (Editor-in-Chief ): Gray’s Anatomy: The Anatomical Basis of 
Medicine and Surgery, 40th British ed. London, Churchill Livingstone/
Elsevier, 2008.
Swartz MH: Textbook of Physical Diagnosis, History and Examination, 
6th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2009.
Torrent-Guasp F, Buckberg GD, Clemente C, Cox JL, Coghlan HC, 
Gharib M: The structure and function of the helical heart and its 
buttress wrapping. I. The normal macroscopic structure of the heart. 
Semin Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg 13:301–319, 2001.
Vilensky JA, Baltes M, Weikel L, Fortin JD, Fourie LJ: Serratus posterior 
muscles: Anatomy, clinical relevance, and function. Clin Anat 14:237–
241, 2001.
Wilson-Pauwels L, Stewart PA, Akesson EJ: Autonomic Nerves—Basic Sci-
ence, Clinical Aspects, Case Studies. Hamilton, ON, Canada, Decker, 1997.
CHAPTER 2
Agur AMR, Dalley AF: Grant’s Atlas of Anatomy, 13th ed. Baltimore, 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013.
Bickley LS, Szilagyi PG: Bates’ Guide to Physical Examination and History 
Taking, 10th ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009.
Cantlie J: On a new arrangement of the right and left lobes of the liver. 
J Anat Physiol (Lond) 32:iv, 1898.
Cheng YF, Huang TL, Chen CL, et al.: Variations of the middle and infe-
rior right hepatic vein: Application in hepatectomy. J Clin Ultrasound 
25:175, 1997.
Ellis H and Mahadevan: Clinical Anatomy, 12th ed. Blackwell Scientiﬁ
 c, 
London 2010.
Fruchaud H: Anatomie chirurgicales des hernies de l’aine. Paris, Doin, 
1956. [Cited in Skandalakis LJ, Gadacz TR, Mansberger AR Jr, Mitch-
ell WE Jr, Colborn GL, Skandalakis JE: Modern Hernia Repair: The 
Embryological and Anatomical Basis of Surgery. New York, Parthe-
non, 1996.]
Kliegman RM, Stanton BMD, St. Geme J, Schor NF and Behrman RE (eds): 
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 19th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2011.
Kumar V, Abbas AK, Fausto N: Robbins & Cotran Pathological Basis of 
Disease, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2009.
Magee DF, Dalley AF: Digestion and the Structure and Function of the 
Gut [Karger Continuing Education Series, Vol. 8]. Basel, Karger, 1986.
References and Suggested Reading
A
APPENDIX
