# Page 1060

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1030
Superior thyroid
artery
Thyrohyoid
Right lateral view
Brachiocephalic 
trunk
Subclavian artery
Inferior laryngeal nerve
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Common carotid
artery
Inferior vagal 
ganglion
Pharyngeal branch
Superior 
laryngeal 
nerve
Internal laryngeal nerve
Trachea
Cricothyroid
External
laryngeal nerve
Right recurrent
laryngeal nerve
FIGURE 8.40. Laryngeal branches of right vagus nerve (CN X). The 
nerves of the larynx are the internal and external branches of the superior 
laryngeal nerve and the inferior laryngeal nerve from the recurrent laryngeal 
nerve. The right recurrent laryngeal nerve passes inferior to the right subcla-
vian artery.
the thyrohyoid membrane and branches to supply the inter-
nal surface of the larynx. The cricothyroid artery, a small 
branch of the superior thyroid artery, supplies the cricothy-
roid muscle. The inferior laryngeal artery, a branch of the 
inferior thyroid artery, accompanies the inferior laryngeal 
nerve (terminal part of the recurrent laryngeal nerve) and 
supplies the mucous membrane and muscles in the inferior 
part of the larynx.
Veins of Larynx. The laryngeal veins accompany the 
laryngeal arteries. The superior laryngeal vein usually 
joins the superior thyroid vein and through it drains into the 
IJV (Fig. 8.39). The inferior laryngeal vein joins the infe-
rior thyroid vein or the venous plexus of veins on the anterior 
aspect of the trachea, which empties into the left brachioce-
phalic vein.
Lymphatics of Larynx. The laryngeal lymphatic vessels 
superior to the vocal folds accompany the superior laryngeal 
artery through the thyrohyoid membrane and drain into the 
superior deep cervical lymph nodes. The lymphatic ves-
sels inferior to the vocal folds drain into the pretracheal or 
paratracheal lymph nodes, which drain into the inferior 
deep cervical lymph nodes (Fig. 8.39).
Nerves of Larynx. The nerves of the larynx are the supe-
rior and inferior laryngeal branches of the vagus nerves (CN 
X). The superior laryngeal nerve arises from the inferior 
vagal ganglion at the superior end of the carotid triangle 
 
(Fig. 8.40). The nerve divides into two terminal branches 
within the carotid sheath: the internal laryngeal nerve (sen-
sory and autonomic) and the external laryngeal nerve (motor).
The internal laryngeal nerve, the larger of the terminal 
branches of the superior laryngeal nerve, pierces the thyro-
hyoid membrane with the superior laryngeal artery, supply-
ing sensory ﬁ
 bers to the laryngeal mucous membrane of the 
laryngeal vestibule and middle laryngeal cavity, including the 
superior surface of the vocal folds. The external laryngeal 
nerve, the smaller terminal branch of the superior laryn-
geal nerve, descends posterior to the sternothyroid muscle in 
company with the superior thyroid artery. At ﬁ
 rst, the exter-
nal laryngeal nerve lies on the inferior pharyngeal constric-
tor; it then pierces the muscle, contributing to its innervation 
(with the pharyngeal plexus), and continues to supply the cri-
cothyroid muscle.
The inferior laryngeal nerve, the continuation of the 
recurrent laryngeal nerve (a branch of the vagus nerve), enters 
the larynx by passing deep to the inferior border of the inferior 
pharyngeal constrictor and medial to the lamina of the thyroid 
cartilage (Figs. 8.37, 8.39, and 8.40). It divides into anterior 
and posterior branches, which accompany the inferior laryn-
geal artery into the larynx. The anterior branch supplies the 
lateral crico-arytenoid, thyro-arytenoid, vocalis, ary-epiglottic, 
and thyro-epiglottic muscles. The posterior branch supplies 
the posterior crico-arytenoid and transverse and oblique ary-
tenoid muscles. Because it supplies all the intrinsic muscles 
except the cricothyroid, the inferior laryngeal nerve is the 
primary motor nerve of the larynx. However, it also provides 
sensory ﬁ
 bers to the mucosa of the infraglottic cavity.
TRACHEA
The trachea, extending from the larynx into the thorax, 
terminates inferiorly as it divides into right and left main 
bronchi. It transports air to and from the lungs, and its epi-
thelium propels debris-laden mucus toward the pharynx for 
expulsion from the mouth. The trachea is a ﬁ
 brocartilaginous 
tube, supported by incomplete cartilaginous tracheal car-
tilages (rings), that occupies a median position in the neck 
(Fig. 8.37). The tracheal cartilages keep the trachea patent; 
they are deﬁ
 cient posteriorly where the trachea is adjacent 
to the esophagus. The posterior gaps in the tracheal rings 
are spanned by the involuntary trachealis muscle, smooth 
muscle connecting the ends of the rings (Fig. 8.41). Hence 
the posterior wall of the trachea is ﬂ
 at.
In adults, the trachea is approximately 2.5 cm in diameter, 
whereas in infants it has the diameter of a pencil. The trachea 
extends from the inferior end of the larynx at the level of the 
C6 vertebra. It ends at the level of the sternal angle or the 
T4–T5 IV disc, where it divides into the right and left main 
bronchi (see Chapter 1, p. 114).
Lateral to the trachea are the common carotid arteries 
and the lobes of the thyroid gland (Fig. 8.39). Inferior to the 
isthmus of the thyroid gland are the jugular venous arch and 
the inferior thyroid veins (Fig. 8.16). The brachiocephalic 
trunk is related to the right side of the trachea in the root of 
