# Page 1111

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1081
and rotation of the eyeball about its anteroposterior axis is differ-
ent for the two eyes when an attempt is made to look downward, 
and especially when looking downward and medially. The person 
can compensate for the diplopia by inclining the head anteriorly 
and laterally toward the side of the normal eye.
TRIGEMINAL NERVE
Injury to Trigeminal Nerve
CN V may be injured by trauma, tumors, aneurysms, or 
meningeal infections (Brannagan et al., 2010). It may 
be involved occasionally in poliomyelitis and general-
ized polyneuropathy, a disease process involving several nerves. 
The sensory and motor nuclei in the pons and medulla may be 
destroyed by intramedullary tumors or vascular lesions. An iso-
lated lesion of the spinal trigeminal tract also may occur with 
multiple sclerosis (MS). Injury to CN V causes the following:
• Paralysis of the muscles of mastication with deviation of 
the mandible toward the side of the lesion (Table 9.6).
• Loss of the ability to appreciate soft tactile, thermal, or 
painful sensations in the face.
• Loss of corneal reﬂ
 ex (blinking in response to the cornea 
being touched) and the sneezing reﬂ
 ex (stimulated by irri-
tants to clear the respiratory tract).
Common causes of facial numbness are dental trauma, herpes 
zoster ophthalmicus (infection caused by a herpesvirus), cranial 
trauma, head and neck tumors, intracranial tumors, and idio-
pathic trigeminal neuropathy (a nerve disease of un 
known cause).
Trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux), the principal dis-
ease affecting the sensory root of CN V, produces excru-
ciating, episodic pain that is usually restricted to the areas 
supplied by the maxillary and/or mandibular divisions of this 
nerve. (See detailed discussion in Chapter 7, p. 862.)
Dental Anesthesia 
Anesthetic agents are commonly administered by 
injection to block pain during dental procedures. CN 
V is of great importance in the practice of dentistry 
because it is the sensory nerve of the head, serving the teeth and 
mucosa of the oral cavity. Because the superior alveolar nerves 
(branches of CN V2) are not accessible, the maxillary teeth are 
locally anesthetized by injecting the agent into the tissues sur-
rounding the roots of the teeth and allowing the solution to 
inﬁ
 ltrate the tissue to reach the terminal (dental) nerve branches 
that enter the roots. By contrast, the inferior alveolar nerve (CN 
V3) is readily accessible and is probably anesthetized more fre-
quently than any other nerve. This procedure is discussed in the 
blue box “Inferior Alveolar Nerve Block” in Chapter 7, p. 927.
ABDUCENT NERVE
Because CN VI has a long intradural course, it is 
often stretched when intracranial pressure rises, 
partly because of the sharp bend it makes over the 
crest of the petrous part of the temporal bone after entering 
the dura. A space-occupying lesion, such as a brain tumor, 
may compress CN VI, causing paralysis of the lateral rectus. 
Complete paralysis of CN VI causes medial deviation of the 
affected eye—that is, it is fully adducted owing to the 
un 
opposed action of the medial rectus, leaving the person 
unable to abduct the eye. Diplopia is present in all ranges of 
movement of the eyeball, except on gazing to the side oppo-
site the lesion. Paralysis of CN VI may also result from:
• An aneurysm of the cerebral arterial circle (at the base of 
the brain) (see Chapter 7, p. 887).
• Pressure from an atherosclerotic internal carotid artery in 
the cavernous sinus, where CN VI is closely related to this 
artery.
• Septic thrombosis of the sinus subsequent to infection in 
the nasal cavities and/or paranasal sinuses.
FACIAL NERVE 
Among motor nerves, CN VII is the most frequently 
paralyzed of all the cranial nerves. Depending on 
the part of the nerve involved, injury to CN VII may 
cause paralysis of facial muscles without loss of taste on the 
anterior two thirds of the tongue or altered secretion of the 
lacrimal and salivary glands.
A lesion of CN VII near its origin or near the geniculate 
ganglion is accompanied by loss of motor, gustatory (taste), 
and autonomic functions. The motor paralysis of facial mus-
cles involves superior and inferior parts of the face on the 
ipsilateral side.
A central lesion of CN VII (lesion of the CNS) results in 
paralysis of muscles in the inferior face on the contralateral 
side; consequently, forehead wrinkling is not visibly impaired 
because it is innervated bilaterally. Lesions between the 
geniculate ganglion and the origin of the chorda tympani 
produce the same effects as that resulting from injury near 
the ganglion, except that lacrimal secretion is not affected. 
Because it passes through the facial canal in the temporal 
bone, CN VII is vulnerable to compression when a viral infec-
tion produces inﬂ
 ammation (viral neuritis) and swelling of the 
nerve just before it emerges from the stylomastoid foramen.
Because the branches of CN VII are superﬁ
 cial, they are 
subject to injury from knife and gunshot wounds, cuts, and 
birth injury. Damage to CN VII is common with fracture of 
the temporal bone and is usually detectable immediately after 
the injury. CN VII may also be affected by tumors of the brain 
and cranium, aneurysms, meningeal infections, and herpes 
viruses. Although injuries to CN VII cause paralysis of facial 
muscles, sensory loss in the small area of skin on the postero-
medial surface of the auricle and around the opening of the 
external acoustic meatus is rare. Similarly, hearing is not usu-
ally impaired, but the ear may become more sensitive to low 
tones when the stapedius (supplied by CN VII) is paralyzed; 
this muscle dampens vibration of the stapes (see Chapter 7).
Bell palsy is a unilateral facial paralysis of sudden onset 
resulting from a lesion of CN VII. This syndrome is illus-
trated and discussed in detail in Chapter 7, p. 861.
