# Page 1022

Chapter 8  •  Neck
992
column so that the chin approaches the manubrium 
(Fig. 8.7E). However, gravity is usually the prime mover 
for this movement when standing erect.
2. Acting antagonistically with the extensors of the neck 
(i.e., the deep cervical muscles), bilateral contraction of 
the SCMs can ﬂ
 ex the lower neck while producing lim-
ited extension at the AO joint and upper neck, protruding 
the chin while keeping the head level. Such ﬂ
 exion move-
ments also occur when lifting the head off the ground 
while lying supine (with gravity providing the resistance 
in place of the deep cervical muscles).
It is probable that most of the time smaller synergistic mus-
cles and/or eccentric contraction (controlled relaxation of the 
muscle, gradually yielding to gravity; see the Introduction) 
are involved in initiating ﬂ
 exion or extension, with the SCMs 
providing the power and range of movement once initiated.
Acting unilaterally, the SCM laterally ﬂ
 exes the neck (bends 
the neck sideways) and rotates the head so the ear approaches 
the shoulder of the ipsilateral (same) side while elevating and 
rotating the chin toward the contralateral (opposite) side. If 
the head and neck are ﬁ
 xed, bilateral contraction of the SCMs 
elevates the clavicles and manubrium and thus the anterior 
ribs. In this way, the SCMs act as accessory muscles of respira-
tion in assisting production of the pump-handle movement of 
the thoracic wall (see p. 83).
To test the SCM, the head is turned to the opposite side 
against resistance (hand against chin). If it is acting normally, 
the SCM can be seen and palpated.
Posterior Cervical Region
The region posterior to the anterior borders of (i.e., 
correspond 
ing to the area of) the trapezius is the poste-
rior cervical region (Fig. 8.6; Table 8.1). The suboccipital 
region is deep to the superior part of this region (see Fig. 8.9, 
and p. 492). The trapezius is a large, ﬂ
 at triangular muscle 
that covers the posterolateral aspect of the neck and thorax 
(Fig. 8.7F). The trapezius is a:
• Superﬁ
 cial muscle of the back (see Chapter 4).
• Posterior axio-appendicular muscle, that acts on the 
 
pectoral girdle (see Chapter 6).
• Cervical muscle, that can produce movement of the 
cranium.
The trapezius attaches the pectoral girdle to the cranium and 
the vertebral column and assists in suspending it. Its attach-
ments, nerve supply, and main actions are described in Table 
8.2. The skin of the posterior cervical region is innervated in 
a segmental pattern by the posterior rami of cervical spinal 
nerves that pierce, but do not innervate, the trapezius (see 
Fig. 4.28, and p. 483).
To test the trapezius, the shoulder is shrugged against 
resistance. If the muscle is acting normally, its superior bor-
der can be seen and palpated. If the trapezius is paralyzed, 
the shoulder droops; however, the combined actions of the 
levator scapulae and superior ﬁ
 bers of the serratus anterior 
help support the shoulder and may compensate for the paral-
ysis to some degree (see Chapter 6).
Lateral Cervical Region
The lateral cervical region (posterior triangle) is bounded 
(Figs. 8.6 and 8.8):
• Anteriorly by the posterior border of the SCM.
• Posteriorly by the anterior border of the trapezius.
• Inferiorly by the middle third of the clavicle between the 
trapezius and the SCM.
• By an apex, where the SCM and trapezius meet on the 
superior nuchal line of the occipital bone.
• By a roof, formed by the investing layer of deep cervical 
fascia.
• By a ﬂ
 oor, formed by muscles covered by the prevertebral 
layer of deep cervical fascia.
The lateral cervical region wraps around the lateral surface 
of the neck like a spiral. The region is covered by skin and 
subcutaneous tissue containing the platysma.
MUSCLES IN LATERAL CERVICAL REGION
The ﬂ
 oor of the lateral cervical region is usually formed by 
the prevertebral fascia overlying four muscles (Fig. 8.9): 
splenius capitis, levator scapulae, middle scalene (L. scale-
nus medius), and posterior scalene (L. scalenus posterior). 
Sometimes the inferior part of the anterior scalene (L. scale-
nus anterior) appears in the inferomedial angle of the lateral 
cervical region, where it is usually hidden by the SCM. An 
occasional offshoot of the anterior scalene, the smallest sca-
lene (L. scalenus minimus), passes posterior to the subclavian 
artery to attach to the 1st rib (Agur and Dalley, 2013).
For a more precise localization of structures, the lateral 
cervical region is divided into a large occipital triangle superi-
orly and a small omoclavicular triangle inferiorly by the infe-
rior belly of the omohyoid (Table 8.1).
• The occipital triangle is so called because the occipital 
artery appears in its apex (Figs. 8.8 and 8.10). The most 
important nerve crossing the occipital triangle is the spi-
nal accessory nerve (CN XI).
• The omoclavicular (subclavian) triangle is indicated on 
the surface of the neck by the supraclavicular fossa. The 
inferior part of the EJV crosses this triangle superﬁ
 cially; 
the subclavian artery lies deep in it (Figs. 8.8 and 8.10). 
These vessels are separated by the investing layer of deep 
cervical fascia. Because the third part of the subclavian 
artery is located in this region, the omoclavicular triangle 
is often called the subclavian triangle (Fig. 8.6).
ARTERIES IN LATERAL CERVICAL REGION
The arteries in the lateral cervical region include the lat-
eral branches of the thyrocervical trunk, the third part of 
