# Page 1038

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1008
clavicle inferior to the level of CN XI may be necessary to 
enable the person to hold and rotate the head normally.
Spasmodic Torticollis
Cervical dystonia (abnormal tonicity of the cervical 
muscles), commonly known as spasmodic torticol-
lis, usually begins in adulthood. It may involve any 
bilateral combination of lateral neck muscles, especially the 
SCM and trapezius. Characteristics of this disorder are sus-
tained turning, tilting, ﬂ
 exing, or extending of the neck. 
Shifting the head laterally or anteriorly can occur involun-
tarily (Fahn et al., 2010). The shoulder is usually elevated and 
displaced anteriorly on the side to which the chin turns.
Subclavian Vein Puncture
The right or left subclavian vein is often the point of 
entry to the venous system for central line placement, 
such as a Swan-Ganz catheter. Central lines are 
inserted to administer parenteral (venous nutritional) ﬂ
 uids 
and medications and to measure central venous pressure. In 
an infraclavicular subclavian vein approach, the administrator 
places the thumb of one hand on the middle part of the clavicle 
and the index ﬁ
 nger on the jugular notch in the manubrium 
(Fig. B8.2). The needle punctures the skin inferior to the 
thumb (middle of the clavicle) and is advanced medially 
toward the tip of the index ﬁ
 nger (jugular notch) until the tip 
enters the right venous angle, posterior to the sterno 
clavicular 
joint. Here the internal jugular and subclavian veins merge to 
form the brachiocephalic vein. If the needle is not inserted 
carefully, it may puncture the pleura and lung, resulting in 
pneumothorax. Furthermore, if the needle is inserted too far 
posteriorly, it may enter the subclavian artery. When the nee-
dle has been inserted correctly, a soft, ﬂ
 exible catheter is 
inserted into the subclavian vein, using the needle as a guide.
Right Cardiac Catheterization
For right cardiac catheterization (to take measure-
ments of pressures in the right chambers of the 
heart), puncture of the IJV can be used to introduce 
a catheter through the right brachiocephalic vein into the supe-
rior vena cava (SVC) and the right side of the heart. Although 
the preferred route is through the IJV or subclavian vein, it may 
be necessary in some patients to use the EJV. This vein is not 
ideal for catheterization because its angle of junction with the 
subclavian vein makes passage of the catheter difﬁ
 cult.
Prominence of External Jugular Vein
The EJV may serve as an “internal barometer.” 
When venous pressure is in the normal range, the 
EJV is usually visible above the clavicle for only a 
FIGURE B8.1.
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle (clavicular
head)
Sternocleidomastoid 
muscle (sternal head)
Index finger in 
jugular notch 
of manubrium
Superior vena cava
Anterior scalene
muscle
Clavicle
Right axillary vein
Right axillary artery
Right subclavian
artery and vein
FIGURE B8.2. Subclavian vein puncture.
