# Page 104

Chapter 1  •  Thorax
74
considered part of it, but are distinctly upper limb muscles 
based on function and innervation. They will be mentioned 
only brieﬂ
 y here.
The domed shape of the thoracic cage provides remark-
able rigidity, given the light weight of its components, 
en 
abling it to:
• Protect vital thoracic and abdominal organs (most air or 
ﬂ
 uid ﬁ
 lled) from external forces.
• Resist the negative (sub-atmospheric) internal pressures 
generated by the elastic recoil of the lungs and inspiratory 
movements.
• Provide attachment for and support the weight of the 
upper limbs.
• Provide the anchoring attachment (origin) of many of 
the muscles that move and maintain the position of the 
upper limbs relative to the trunk, as well as provide the 
attachments for muscles of the abdomen, neck, back, and 
respiration.
Although the shape of the thoracic cage provides rigid-
ity, its joints and the thinness and ﬂ
 exibility of the ribs 
allow it to absorb many external blows and compressions 
without fracture and to change its shape for respiration. 
Because the most important structures within the thorax 
(heart, great vessels, lungs, and trachea), as well as its ﬂ
 oor 
and walls, are constantly in motion, the thorax is one of 
the most dynamic regions of the body. With each breath, 
the muscles of the thoracic wall—working in concert with 
the diaphragm and muscles of the abdominal wall—vary 
the volume of the thoracic cavity, ﬁ
 rst by expanding the 
capacity of the cavity, thereby causing the lungs to expand 
and draw air in and then, due to lung elasticity and muscle 
relaxation, decreasing the volume of the cavity and causing 
them to expel air.
Skeleton of Thoracic Wall
The thoracic skeleton forms the osteocartilaginous thoracic 
cage (Fig. 1.1), which protects the thoracic viscera and some 
abdominal organs. The thoracic skeleton includes 12 pairs 
of ribs and associated costal cartilages, 12 thoracic vertebrae 
and the intervertebral (IV) discs interposed between them, 
and the sternum. The ribs and costal cartilages form the larg-
est part of the thoracic cage; both are identiﬁ
 ed numerically, 
from the most superior (1st rib or costal cartilage) to the most 
inferior (12th).
RIBS, COSTAL CARTILAGES, 
AND INTERCOSTAL SPACES
Ribs (L. costae) are curved, ﬂ
 at bones that form most of the 
thoracic cage (Figs. 1.1 and 1.2). They are remarkably light 
in weight yet highly resilient. Each rib has a spongy interior 
containing bone marrow (hematopoietic tissue), which forms 
blood cells. There are three types of ribs that can be classiﬁ
 ed 
as typical or atypical:
1. True (vertebrosternal) ribs (1st–7th ribs): They attach 
directly to the sternum through their own costal carti-
lages.
2. False (vertebrochondral) ribs (8th, 9th, and usually 
10th ribs): Their cartilages are connected to the cartilage 
of the rib above them; thus their connection with the ster-
num is indirect.
3. Floating (vertebral, free) ribs (11th, 12th, and some-
times 10th ribs): The rudimentary cartilages of these ribs 
do not connect even indirectly with the sternum; instead 
they end in the posterior abdominal musculature.
Typical ribs (3rd–9th) have the following components:
• Head: wedge-shaped and has two facets, separated by 
the crest of the head (Figs. 1.2 and 1.3); one facet for 
articulation with the numerically corresponding vertebra 
and one facet for the vertebra superior to it.
• Neck: connects the head of the rib with the body at the 
level of the tubercle.
• Tubercle: located at the junction of the neck and body; 
a smooth articular part articulates with the correspond-
ing transverse process of the vertebra, and a rough non-
articular part provides attachment for the costotransverse 
ligament (see Fig. 1.8B).
• Body (shaft): thin, ﬂ
 at, and curved, most markedly at the 
costal angle where the rib turns anterolaterally. The angle 
also demarcates the lateral limit of attachment of the deep 
back muscles to the ribs (see Table 4.6 in Chapter 4). The 
concave internal surface of the body has a costal groove
paralleling the inferior border of the rib, which provides 
some protection for the intercostal nerve and vessels.
Atypical ribs (1st, 2nd, and 10th–12th) are dissimilar (Fig. 1.3):
• The 1st rib is the broadest (i.e., its body is widest and 
nearly horizontal), shortest, and most sharply curved of 
OVERVIEW OF THORAX
The thorax, consisting of the thoracic cavity, its contents, 
and the wall that surrounds it, is the part of the trunk 
between the neck and abdomen. ♦ The shape and size 
of the thoracic cavity and thoracic wall are different 
from that of the chest (upper trunk or torso) because the 
latter includes some upper limb bones and muscles and, 
in adult females, the breasts. ♦ The thorax includes the 
primary organs of the respiratory and cardiovascular 
systems. ♦ The thoracic cavity is divided into three 
compartments: the central mediastinum, occupied by 
the heart and structures transporting air, blood, and 
food; and the right and left pulmonary cavities, occupied 
by the lungs.
The Bottom Line
