# Page 1076

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1046
the thyrohyoid membrane and the anesthetic agent bathes 
the internal laryngeal nerve, the larger terminal branch of the 
superior laryngeal nerve. Anesthesia of the laryngeal mucosa 
occurs superior to the vocal folds and includes the superior 
surface of these folds.
Cancer of Larynx
The incidence of cancer of the larynx is high in 
individuals who smoke cigarettes or chew tobacco. 
Most persons present with persistent hoarseness, 
often associated with otalgia (earache) and dysphagia (dif-
ﬁ
 culty in swallowing). Enlarged pretracheal or paratracheal 
lymph nodes may indicate the presence of laryngeal 
cancer. Laryngectomy (removal of the larynx) may be per-
formed in severe cases of cancer. Vocal rehabilitation can 
be accomplished by the use of an electrolarynx, a tracheo-
esophageal prosthesis, or esophageal speech (regurgitation 
of ingested air).
Age Changes in Larynx
The larynx grows steadily until approximately 
3 years of age, after which little growth occurs until 
approximately 12 years of age. Before puberty, no 
major laryngeal sex differences exist. Owing to the pres-
ence of testosterone at puberty in males, the walls of the 
larynx strengthen, and the laryngeal cavity enlarges. There 
is only a slight increase in the size of the larynx of most 
girls. In boys, all of the laryngeal cartilages enlarge and the 
laryngeal prominence becomes conspicuous in most 
Paralysis of the superior laryngeal nerve causes anesthesia 
of the superior laryngeal mucosa. As a result, the protective 
mechanism designed to keep foreign bodies out of the larynx 
is inactive, and foreign bodies can easily enter the larynx. 
Injury to the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve 
results in a voice that is monotonous in character because the 
paralyzed cricothyroid muscle supplied by it is unable to vary 
the length and tension of the vocal fold (Table 8.5, p. 1028). 
Such an injury may be unnoticed in individuals who do not 
usually employ a wide range of tone in their speech, but it 
may be critical to singers or public speakers.
To avoid injury to the external branch of the superior 
laryngeal nerve (e.g., during thyroidectomy), the superior 
thyroid artery is ligated and sectioned more superior to the 
gland, where it is not as closely related to the nerve. Because 
an enlarged thyroid gland (goiter) may itself cause impaired 
inner 
vation of the larynx by compressing the laryngeal nerves, 
the vocal folds are examined by laryngoscopy before an oper-
ation in this area. In this way, damage to the larynx or its 
nerves resulting from a surgical mishap may be distinguished 
from a pre-existing injury resulting from nerve compression.
Superior Laryngeal Nerve Block
A superior laryngeal nerve block is often adminis-
tered with endotracheal intubation in the conscious 
patient. This technique is used for peroral endos-
copy, transesophageal echocardiography, and laryngeal and 
esophageal instrumentation. The needle is inserted midway 
between the thyroid cartilage and the hyoid, 1–5 cm anterior 
to the greater horn of the hyoid. The needle passes through 
2nd and 4th
tracheal rings
Deep cervical
fascia
Tracheostomy
tube
Pretracheal fascia  
Esophagus
Trachea
Incision in trachea after 
retracting infrahyoid muscles  
and incising isthmus of thyroid
FIGURE B8.13. Tracheostomy.
