# Page 1051

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1021
aspect of the thyroid gland where the parathyroid glands are 
located, branches of these arteries usually supply these glands 
(Figs. 8.26B and 8.30A). However, they may also be supplied by 
branches from the superior thyroid arteries; thyroid ima artery; 
or laryngeal, tracheal, and esophageal arteries. Parathyroid 
veins drain into the thyroid plexus of veins of the thyroid gland 
and trachea (Fig. 8.28). Lymphatic vessels from the parathyroid 
glands drain with those from the thyroid gland into deep cervi-
cal lymph nodes and paratracheal lymph nodes (Fig. 8.29).
Nerves of Parathyroid Glands. The nerve supply of 
the parathyroid glands is abundant; it is derived from thyroid 
branches of the cervical (sympathetic) ganglia (Fig. 8.25). 
Like the nerves to the thyroid, they are vasomotor rather than 
secretomotor because these glands are hormonally regulated.
Respiratory Layer of Cervical Viscera
The viscera of the respiratory layer, the larynx and trachea, 
contribute to the respiratory functions of the body. The main 
functions of the cervical respiratory viscera are as follows:
• Routing air and food into the respiratory tract and esopha-
gus, respectively.
• Providing a patent airway and a means of sealing it off 
temporarily (a “valve”).
• Producing voice.
Nerve to thyrohyoid
Sternohyoid, reflected
superiorly
Anterior view
Brachiocephalic trunk
Inferior thyroid vein
Subclavian artery
Internal jugular vein
Common carotid artery
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Middle thyroid vein
Superior thyroid vein
Sternocleidomastoid branch
Superior laryngeal nerve, 
external branch
External carotid artery
Superior laryngeal nerve, 
internal branch
Sternohyoid, reflected
inferiorly
Left lobe of
thyroid gland
Sternothyroid
Cricothyroid
Accessory thyroid gland
Thyrohyoid
Thyroid cartilage
Thyroid plexus of veins
Superior thyroid artery
Right lobe of thyroid gland
Trachea
Sternothyroid (cut end)
Sternothyroid (cut end)
FIGURE 8.28. Thyroid gland. A dissection of the anterior aspect of the neck is shown. In this specimen, there is a small accessory thyroid gland on the right, 
lying on the thyrohyoid muscle, lateral to the thyroid cartilage. The superior thyroid artery is distributed primarily to the anterosuperior portion of the gland.
Superior deep cervical   
Inferior deep cervical
Submental 
Submandibular 
Prelaryngeal 
Paratracheal  
Pretracheal  
FIGURE 8.29. Lymphatic drainage of thyroid gland, larynx, and 
 
trachea. The arrows indicate the direction of lymph ﬂ
 ow.
