# Page 1108

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1078
the hyoid muscles, with some of the sensory ﬁ
 bers passing 
retrograde along it to reach the dura mater of the posterior 
cranial fossa (see Fig. 8.13B, p. 997). CN XII passes inferiorly 
medial to the angle of the mandible and then curves anteri-
orly to enter the tongue (Fig. 9.18).
CN XII ends in many branches that supply all the extrin-
sic muscles of the tongue, except the palatoglossus (which 
is actually a palatine muscle). CN XII has the following 
branches:
• A meningeal branch returns to the cranium through the 
hypoglossal canal and innervates the dura mater on the 
ﬂ
 oor and posterior wall of the posterior cranial fossa. The 
nerve ﬁ
 bers conveyed are from the sensory spinal gan-
glion of spinal nerve C2 and are not hypoglossal ﬁ
 bers.
• The superior root of the ansa cervicalis branches from 
CN XII to supply the infrahyoid muscles (sternohyoid, 
sternothyroid, and omohyoid). This branch actually con-
veys only ﬁ
 bers from the cervical plexus (the loop between 
the anterior rami of C1 and C2) that joined the nerve out-
side the cranial cavity, not hypoglossal ﬁ
 bers (Fig. 9.18). 
Some ﬁ
 bers continue past the origin of the superior root 
to reach the thyrohyoid muscle.
• Terminal lingual branches supply the styloglossus, hyo-
glossus, genioglossus, and intrinsic muscles of the tongue.
HYPOGLOSSAL NERVE
¨ The hypoglossal nerves (CN XII) supply somatic 
motor ﬁ
 bers to the intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of the 
tongue, except the palatoglossus (a palatine muscle). 
¨ They arise by several rootlets between the pyramids 
and the olives of the medulla. ¨ They pass through 
the hypoglossal canals and run inferiorly and anteri-
orly, passing medial to the angles of the mandible and 
between the mylohyoid and the hyoglossus to reach the 
muscles of the tongue.
The Bottom Line
CRANIAL NERVES
Cranial Nerve Injuries
Table 9.6 summarizes some common cranial nerve 
injuries, indicating the type or site of lesions and 
abnormal ﬁ
 ndings that result. Injury to the cranial 
nerves is a frequent complication of a fracture in the base of 
the cranium. Furthermore, excessive movement of the brain 
within the cranium may tear or bruise cranial nerve ﬁ
 bers, 
especially those of CN I. Paralysis of cranial nerves as a result 
of trauma can usually be detected as soon as the patient’s state 
of consciousness permits (Brannagan et al., 2010); however, in 
some people, the paralysis may not be evident for several days.
Because of their location within the conﬁ
 ned cranial cavity, 
relatively ﬁ
 xed positions, and sometimes close relationships to 
bony or vascular formations, the intracranial portions of cer-
tain cranial nerves are also susceptible to compression owing 
to a tumor or aneurysm. In such cases, the onset of symptoms 
usually occurs gradually, and the effects depend on the extent 
of the pressure exerted. Because of their close relationship 
to the cavernous sinus, CN III, CN IV, CN V1 and especially 
CN VI are susceptible to compression or injury related to 
pathologies (infections, thrombophlebitis) affecting the sinus.
OLFACTORY NERVE
Anosmia—Loss of Smell
The loss of smell (anosmia) is frequently associ-
ated with upper respiratory infections, sinus dis-
ease, and head trauma. Loss of olfactory ﬁ
 bers 
occurs with aging. Consequently, elderly people often have 
reduced acuity of the sensation of smell, resulting from 
progressive reduction in the number of olfactory receptor 
neurons in the olfactory epithelium. The chief complaint 
of most people with anosmia is the loss or alteration of 
taste; however, clinical studies reveal that in all but a few 
people, the dysfunction is in the olfactory system (Simpson, 
2006). The reason is that most people confuse taste with 
ﬂ
 avor. Transitory olfactory impairment occurs as a result of 
viral or allergic rhinitis—inﬂ
 ammation of the nasal mucous 
membrane.
To test the sense of smell, the person is blindfolded and 
asked to identify common odors, such as freshly ground coffee 
placed near the external nares (nostrils). One naris is occluded 
and the eyes are closed. Because anosmia is usually unilateral, 
each naris is tested separately. If the loss of smell is unilateral, 
the person may not be aware of it without clinical testing.
Injury to the nasal mucosa, olfactory nerve ﬁ
 bers, olfac-
tory bulbs, or olfactory tracts may also impair smell. In 
severe head injuries, the olfactory bulbs may be torn away 
from the olfactory nerves, or some olfactory nerve ﬁ
 bers 
may be torn as they pass through a fractured cribriform 
plate. If all the nerve bundles on one side are torn, a com-
plete loss of smell will occur on that side; consequently, 
anosmia may be a clue to a fracture of the cranial base and 
cerebrospinal ﬂ
 uid rhinorrhea (leakage of the ﬂ
 uid through 
the nose).
A tumor and/or abscess in the frontal lobe of the brain or 
a tumor of the meninges (meningioma) in the anterior cranial 
fossa may also cause anosmia by compressing the olfactory 
bulb and/or tract (Bruce et al., 2010).
