# Page 1031

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1001
MUSCLES IN ANTERIOR CERVICAL REGION
In the anterolateral part of the neck, the hyoid provides 
attachments for the suprahyoid muscles superior to it and 
the infrahyoid muscles inferior to it. These hyoid muscles 
steady or move the hyoid and larynx (Figs. 8.15, 8.16, and 
8.18). For descriptive purposes, they are divided into supra-
hyoid and infrahyoid muscles, the attachments, innervation, 
and main actions of which are presented in Table 8.3.
The suprahyoid muscles are superior to the hyoid and 
connect it to the cranium (Figs. 8.14–8.16 and 8.18; Table 
8.3). The suprahyoid group of muscles includes the mylo-
hyoid, geniohyoid, stylohyoid, and digastric muscles. As a 
group, these muscles constitute the substance of the ﬂ
 oor 
of the mouth, supporting the hyoid in providing a base from 
which the tongue functions and elevating the hyoid and lar-
ynx in relation to swallowing and tone production. Each 
digastric muscle has two bellies, joined by an interme-
diate tendon that descends toward the hyoid. A ﬁ
 brous 
sling derived from the pretracheal layer of deep cervical 
fascia allows the tendon to slide anteriorly and posteriorly 
as it connects this tendon to the body and greater horn of 
the hyoid.
The difference in nerve supply between the anterior and 
the posterior bellies of the digastric muscles results from 
their different embryological origin from the 1st and 2nd 
pharyngeal arches, respectively. CN V supplies derivatives 
of the 1st arch, and CN VII supplies those of the 2nd arch.
The infrahyoid muscles, often called strap muscles 
because of their ribbon-like appearance, are inferior to the 
hyoid (Figs. 8.14 and 8.18; Table 8.3). These four muscles 
anchor the hyoid, sternum, clavicle, and scapula and depress 
the hyoid and larynx during swallowing and speaking. They 
also work with the suprahyoid muscles to steady the hyoid, 
providing a ﬁ
 rm base for the tongue. The infrahyoid group 
of muscles are arranged in two planes: a superﬁ
 cial plane, 
made up of the sternohyoid and omohyoid, and a deep plane, 
composed of the sternothyroid and thyrohyoid.
Like the digastric, the omohyoid has two bellies (superior 
and inferior) united by an intermediate tendon. The fascial 
sling for the intermediate tendon connects to the clavicle.
The sternothyroid is wider than the sternohyoid, under 
which it lies. The sternothyroid covers the lateral lobe of the 
thyroid gland. Its attachment to the oblique line of the lamina 
of the thyroid cartilage immediately superior to the gland 
limits upward extension of an enlarged thyroid (see the blue 
box “Enlargement of Thyroid Gland” on p. 1042). The thy-
rohyoid appears to be the continuation of the sternothyroid 
muscle, running superiorly from the oblique line of the thy-
roid cartilage to the hyoid.
ARTERIES IN ANTERIOR CERVICAL REGION
The anterior cervical region contains the carotid system 
of arteries, consisting of the common carotid artery and its 
terminal branches, the internal and external carotid arter-
ies. It also contains the IJV, its tributaries, and the anterior 
jugular veins (Figs. 8.19 and Fig. 8.20). The common carotid 
artery and one of its terminal branches, the external carotid 
artery, are the main arterial vessels in the carotid triangle. 
Branches of the external carotid (e.g., the superior thyroid 
artery) also originate in the carotid triangle. Each common 
carotid artery ascends within the carotid sheath with the IJV 
and vagus nerve to the level of the superior border of the 
thyroid cartilage. Here, each common carotid artery termi-
nates by dividing into the internal and external carotid arter-
ies. The internal carotid artery has no branches in the neck; 
the external carotid has several.
The right common carotid artery begins at the bifur-
cation of the brachiocephalic trunk. The right subclavian 
artery is the other branch of this trunk. From the arch of 
the aorta, the left common carotid artery ascends into the 
neck. Consequently, the left common carotid has a course 
of approximately 2 cm in the superior mediastinum before 
entering the neck.
The internal carotid arteries are direct continuations 
of the common carotids superior to the origin of the exter-
nal carotid artery, at the level of the superior border of the 
thyroid cartilage. The proximal part of each internal carotid 
artery is the site of the carotid sinus, discussed earlier on 
p. 1000 (Figs. 8.17 and 8.19). The carotid body is located in 
the cleft between the internal and the external carotid arter-
ies. The internal carotid arteries enter the cranium through 
the carotid canals in the petrous parts of the temporal bones 
and become the main arteries of the brain and structures in 
the orbits (see Chapter 7). No named branches arise from 
the internal carotid arteries in the neck.
The external carotid arteries supply most structures 
external to the cranium; the orbit and the part of the  
forehead 
Carotid sinus nerve
Carotid sinus 
Carotid body
Common carotid artery
Internal carotid artery
External carotid artery
Glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX)
Medial view of right carotid artery
FIGURE 8.17. Carotid body and carotid sinus. This small epithelioid 
body lies within the bifurcation of the common carotid artery. The carotid 
sinus and the associated network of sensory ﬁ
 bers of the glossopharyngeal 
nerve (CN IX) are also shown.
