# Page 1047

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1017
The middle cervical ganglion, the smallest of the three 
ganglia, is occasionally absent. When present, it lies on the 
anterior aspect of the inferior thyroid artery at the level of 
the cricoid cartilage and the transverse process of C6 ver-
tebra, just anterior to the vertebral artery (Figs. 8.25 and 
8.27). Postsynaptic ﬁ
 bers pass from the ganglion via gray 
rami communicantes to the anterior rami of the C5 and C6 
spinal nerves, via a middle cervical cardiac (cardiopulmonary 
splanchnic) nerve to the heart and via arterial branches to 
form the peri-arterial plexuses to the thyroid gland.
The superior cervical ganglion is at the level of the 
C1 and C2 vertebrae (Figs. 8.24B and 8.25A). Because of its 
large size, it forms a good landmark for locating the sympa-
thetic trunk, but it may need to be distinguished from a large 
sensory (nodose) ganglion of the vagus (CN X) when present. 
Postsynaptic ﬁ
 bers pass from it by means of cephalic arterial 
branches to form the internal carotid sympathetic plexus and 
then enter the cranial cavity (Fig. 8.25). This ganglion also 
sends arterial branches to the external carotid artery and gray 
rami to the anterior rami of the superior four cervical spinal 
nerves. Other postsynaptic ﬁ
 bers pass from it to the cardiac 
plexus of nerves via a superior cervical cardiac (cardiopul-
monary splanchnic) nerve (see Chapter 1, p. 150).
recurrent laryngeal nerves ascend superiorly to the postero-
medial aspect of the thyroid gland (Figs. 8.24, 8.26B, and 
8.27), where they ascend in the tracheo-esophageal groove, 
supplying both trachea and esophagus and all the intrinsic 
muscles of the larynx except the cricothyroid.
The cardiac branches of CN X originate in the neck 
(Fig. 8.24B) as well as in the thorax and convey presynaptic 
parasympathetic and visceral afferent ﬁ
 bers to the cardiac 
plexus of nerves (see Chapter 1, p.150 and Fig. 1.68C).
Phrenic Nerves. The phrenic nerves are formed at the 
lateral borders of the anterior scalene muscles (Figs. 8.24A 
and 8.25B), mainly from the C4 nerve with contributions 
from C3 and C5. The phrenic nerves descend anterior to 
the anterior scalene muscles under cover of the IJVs and the 
SCMs. They pass under the prevertebral layer of deep cer-
vical fascia, between the subclavian arteries and veins, and 
proceed to the thorax to supply the diaphragm. The phrenic 
nerves are important because, in addition to their sensory 
distribution, they provide the sole motor supply to their own 
half of the diaphragm (see Chapter 2, p. 307 for details).
Sympathetic Trunks. The cervical portion of the 
sympathetic trunks lie anterolateral to the vertebral column, 
extending superiorly to the level of the C1 vertebra or cranial 
base (Figs. 8.24B and 8.25). The sympathetic trunks receive no 
white rami communicantes in the neck (recall that white rami 
associated with cervical spinal nerves). The cervical portion 
of the trunks includes three cervical sympathetic ganglia: 
superior, middle, and inferior. These ganglia receive presynap-
tic ﬁ
 bers conveyed to the trunk by the superior thoracic spinal 
nerves and their associated white rami communicantes, which 
then ascend through the sympathetic trunk to the ganglia. 
After synapsing with the postsynaptic neuron in the cervical 
sympathetic ganglia, postsynaptic neurons send ﬁ
 bers to the:
1. Cervical spinal nerves via gray rami communicantes.
2. Thoracic viscera via cardiopulmonary splanchnic nerves.
3. Head and viscera of the neck via cephalic arterial branches 
(rami).
The latter ﬁ
 bers accompany arteries as sympathetic peri-
arterial nerve plexuses, especially the vertebral and internal 
and external carotid arteries (Fig. 8.25).
In approximately 80% of people, the inferior cervical 
ganglion fuses with the ﬁ
 rst thoracic ganglion to form the 
large cervicothoracic ganglion (stellate ganglion). This 
star-shaped (L. stella, a star) ganglion lies anterior to the 
transverse process of the C7 vertebra, just superior to the 
neck of the 1st rib on each side and posterior to the origin of 
the vertebral artery (Fig. 8.24B). Some postsynaptic ﬁ
 bers 
from the ganglion pass via gray rami communicantes to the 
anterior rami of the C7 and C8 spinal nerves (roots of the 
brachial plexus), and others pass to the heart via the inferior 
cervical cardiac nerve (a cardiopulmonary splanchnic nerve), 
which passes along the trachea to the deep cardiac plexus. 
Other ﬁ
 bers pass via arterial branches to contribute to the 
sympathetic peri-arterial nerve plexus around the vertebral 
artery running into the cranial cavity (Fig. 8.25A).
DEEP STRUCTURES OF NECK
Cervicothoracic Ganglion Block
Anesthetic injected around the large cervico-
thoracic ganglion blocks transmission of stimuli 
through the cervical and superior thoracic ganglia. 
This ganglion block may relieve vascular spasms involving 
the brain and upper limb. It is also useful when deciding if 
a surgical resection of the ganglion would be beneﬁ
 cial to a 
person with excess vasoconstriction in the ipsilateral limb.
Lesion of Cervical 
Sympathetic Trunk
A lesion of a cervical sympathetic trunk in the 
neck results in a sympathetic disturbance called 
Horner syndrome, which is characterized by:
• Contraction of the pupil (miosis), resulting from paral-
ysis of the dilator pupillae muscle (see Chapter 7).
• Drooping of the superior eyelid (ptosis), resulting from 
paralysis of the smooth (tarsal) muscle intermingled with 
the striated muscle of the levator palpebrae superioris.
• Sinking in of the eye (enophthalmos), possibly caused 
by paralysis of the rudimentary smooth (orbital) mus-
cle in the ﬂ
 oor of the orbit.
• Vasodilation and absence of sweating on the face and 
neck (anhydrosis), caused by lack of a sympathetic 
(vasoconstrictive) nerve supply to the blood vessels and 
sweat glands.
