# Page 1053

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1023
The vocal ligaments make up the submucosal skeleton of the 
vocal folds. These ligaments are the thickened, free superior 
border of the conus elasticus or cricovocal membrane. 
The parts of the membrane extending laterally between the 
vocal folds and the superior border of the cricoid are the lat-
eral cricothyroid ligaments. The ﬁ
 bro-elastic conus elasti-
cus blends anteriorly with the median cricothyroid ligament. 
The conus elasticus and overlying mucosa close the tracheal 
inlet except for the central rima glottidis (opening between 
the vocal folds).
The epiglottic cartilage, consisting of elastic cartilage, 
gives ﬂ
 exibility to the epiglottis, a heart-shaped cartilage 
covered with mucous membrane (Fig. 8.32B). Situated pos-
terior to the root of the tongue and the hyoid and anterior 
to the laryngeal inlet, the epiglottic cartilage forms the 
superior part of the anterior wall and the superior margin of 
the inlet. Its broad superior end is free. Its tapered inferior 
end, the stalk of the epiglottis, is attached to the angle 
formed by the thyroid laminae by the thyro-epiglottic liga-
ment (Fig. 8.32E). The hyo-epiglottic ligament attaches 
the anterior surface of the epiglottic cartilage to the hyoid 
(Fig. 8.33). The quadrangular membrane (Figs. 8.32B 
and 8.34) is a thin, submucosal sheet of connective tissue 
that extends between the lateral aspects of the arytenoid and 
epiglottic cartilages. Its free inferior margin constitutes the 
vestibular ligament, which is covered loosely by mucosa to 
form the vestibular fold (Fig. 8.34). This fold lies superior 
to the vocal fold and extends from the thyroid cartilage to the 
arytenoid cartilage. The free superior margin of the quad-
rangular membrane forms the ary-epiglottic ligament, 
which is covered with mucosa to form the ary-epiglottic 
fold. The corniculate and cuneiform cartilages appear 
as small nodules in the posterior part of the ary-epiglottic 
folds. The corniculate cartilages attach to the apices of the 
arytenoid cartilages; the cuneiform cartilages do not directly 
attach to other cartilages. The quadrangular membrane and 
conus elasticus are the superior and inferior parts of the sub-
mucosal ﬁ
 bro-elastic membrane of the larynx.
Interior of Larynx. The laryngeal cavity extends from 
the laryngeal inlet, through which it communicates with the 
laryngopharynx, to the level of the inferior border of the cri-
coid cartilage. Here the laryngeal cavity is continuous with 
the cavity of the trachea (Figs. 8.34 and 8.35A & B). The 
laryngeal cavity includes the:
• Laryngeal vestibule: between the laryngeal inlet and 
the vestibular folds.
• Middle part of the laryngeal cavity: the central cavity 
(airway) between the vestibular and vocal folds.
• Laryngeal ventricle: recesses extending laterally from 
the middle part of the laryngeal cavity between vestibular 
and vocal folds. The laryngeal saccule is a blind pocket 
opening into each ventricle that is lined with mucosal 
glands.
• Infraglottic cavity: the inferior cavity of the larynx 
between the vocal folds and the inferior border of the 
Laryngeal Skeleton. The laryngeal skeleton consists of 
nine cartilages: three are single (thyroid, cricoid, and epiglot-
tic), and three are paired (arytenoid, corniculate, and cunei-
form) (Fig. 8.32A & B).
The thyroid cartilage is the largest of the cartilages; 
its superior border lies opposite the C4 vertebra. The infe-
rior two thirds of its two plate-like laminae fuse anteriorly 
in the median plane to form the laryngeal prominence 
(Fig. 8.32A & D). This projection (“Adam’s apple”) is well 
marked in men but seldom visible in women. Superior to 
this prominence, the laminae diverge to form a V-shaped 
superior thyroid notch. The less distinct inferior thyroid 
notch is a shallow indentation in the middle of the inferior 
border of the cartilage.
The posterior border of each lamina projects superiorly as 
the superior horn and inferiorly as the inferior horn. The 
superior border and superior horns attach to the hyoid by the 
thyrohyoid membrane (Fig. 8.32A & B). The thick median 
part of this membrane is the median thyrohyoid ligament; 
its lateral parts are the lateral thyrohyoid ligaments.
The inferior horns articulate with the lateral surfaces of 
the cricoid cartilage at the cricothyroid joints (Fig. 8.32B). 
The main movements at these joints are rotation and glid-
ing of the thyroid cartilage, which result in changes in the 
length of the vocal folds. The cricoid cartilage is shaped 
like a signet ring with its band facing anteriorly. This ring-like 
opening of the cartilage ﬁ
 ts an average ﬁ
 nger. The posterior 
(signet) part of the cricoid is the lamina, and the anterior 
(band) part is the arch (Fig. 8.32A). Although much smaller 
than the thyroid cartilage, the cricoid cartilage is thicker and 
stronger and is the only complete ring of cartilage to encircle 
any part of the airway. It attaches to the inferior margin of 
the thyroid cartilage by the median cricothyroid ligament 
and to the ﬁ
 rst tracheal ring by the cricotracheal ligament. 
Where the larynx is closest to the skin and most accessible, 
the median cricothyroid ligament may be felt as a soft spot 
during palpation inferior to the thyroid cartilage.
The arytenoid cartilages are paired, three-sided pyra-
midal cartilages that articulate with the lateral parts of the 
superior border of the cricoid cartilage lamina (Fig. 8.32B). 
Each cartilage has an apex superiorly, a vocal process ante-
riorly, and a large muscular process that projects laterally 
from its base. The apex bears the corniculate cartilage and 
attaches to the ary-epiglottic fold. The vocal process pro-
vides the posterior attachment for the vocal ligament, and 
the muscular process serves as a lever to which the posterior 
and lateral crico-arytenoid muscles are attached. The crico-
arytenoid joints, located between the bases of the arytenoid 
cartilages and the superolateral surfaces of the lamina of the 
cricoid cartilage (Fig. 8.32B), permit the arytenoid cartilages 
to slide toward or away from one to another, to tilt anteriorly 
and posteriorly, and to rotate. These movements are impor-
tant in approximating, tensing, and relaxing the vocal folds.
The elastic vocal ligaments extend from the junction of 
the laminae of the thyroid cartilage anteriorly to the vocal 
process of the arytenoid cartilage posteriorly (Fig. 8.32E). 
