# Page 1045

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1015
The thyrocervical trunk arises from the anterosupe-
rior aspect of the ﬁ
 rst part of the subclavian artery, near the 
medial border of the anterior scalene muscle. It has four 
branches, the largest and most important of which is the 
inferior thyroid artery, the primary visceral artery of the 
neck, supplying the larynx, trachea, esophagus, and thyroid 
and parathyroid glands, as well as adjacent muscles. The 
other branches of the thyrocervical trunk are the ascending 
cervical and suprascapular arteries, and the cervicodorsal 
trunk (transverse cervical artery). The branches of the cer-
vicodorsal artery were discussed previously, with the lateral 
cervical region (p. 994). The terminal branches of the thyro-
cervical trunk are the inferior thyroid and ascending cervi-
cal arteries. The latter is a small artery that sends muscular 
branches to the lateral muscles of the upper neck and spinal 
branches into the intervertebral foramina.
The costocervical trunk arises from the posterior 
aspect of the second part of the subclavian artery (posterior 
to the anterior scalene on the right side [Fig. 8.11] and usu-
ally just medial to this muscle on the left side). The trunk 
passes posterosuperiorly and divides into the superior inter-
costal and deep cervical arteries, which supply the ﬁ
 rst two 
intercostal spaces and the posterior deep cervical muscles, 
respectively.
VEINS IN ROOT OF NECK
Two large veins terminating in the root of the neck are the 
EJV, draining blood received mostly from the scalp and 
face, and the variable anterior jugular vein (AJV), usu-
ally the smallest of the jugular veins (Figs. 8.15 and 8.20). 
The AJV typically arises near the hyoid from the conﬂ
 uence 
of superﬁ
 cial submandibular veins. The AJV descends either 
in the subcutaneous tissue or deep to the investing layer of 
deep cervical fascia between the anterior median line and 
the anterior border of the SCM. At the root of the neck, the 
AJV turns laterally, posterior to the SCM, and opens into the 
termination of the EJV or into the subclavian vein. Superior 
to the manubrium, the right and left AJVs commonly unite 
across the midline to form the jugular venous arch in the 
suprasternal space (Fig. 8.16).
The subclavian vein, the continuation of the axillary 
vein, begins at the lateral border of the 1st rib and ends when 
it unites with the IJV (Fig. 8.24A). The subclavian vein passes 
over the 1st rib anterior to the scalene tubercle parallel to the 
subclavian artery, but it is separated from it by the anterior 
scalene muscle. It usually has only one named tributary, the 
EJV (Fig. 8.20).
The IJV ends posterior to the medial end of the clavicle by 
uniting with the subclavian vein to form the brachiocephalic 
vein. This union is commonly referred to as the venous 
angle and is the site where the thoracic duct (left side) 
and the right lymphatic trunk (right side) drain lymph col-
lected throughout the body into the venous circulation 
(see Fig. 8.48). Throughout its course, the IJV is enclosed by 
the carotid sheath (Fig. 8.21).
The subclavian arteries supply the upper limbs; they 
also send branches to the neck and brain (Figs. 8.19 and 
8.24). The right subclavian artery arises from the bra-
chiocephalic trunk. The left subclavian artery arises from 
the arch of the aorta, about 1 cm distal to the left common 
carotid artery. The left vagus nerve runs parallel to the ﬁ
 rst 
part of the artery (Fig. 8.24A). Although the subclavian arter-
ies of the two sides have different origins, their courses in 
the neck begin posterior to the respective SC joints as they 
ascend through the superior thoracic aperture and enter the 
root of the neck.
The subclavian arteries arch superolaterally, reaching an 
apex as they pass posterior to the anterior scalene muscles. 
As they begin to descend, they disappear posterior to the 
middle of the clavicles. As the subclavian arteries cross the 
outer margin of the ﬁ
 rst ribs, their name changes; they 
become the axillary arteries. Three parts of each subclavian 
artery are described relative to the anterior scalene: the ﬁ
 rst 
part is medial to the muscle, the second part is posterior to 
it, and the third part is lateral to it (Figs. 8.11 and 8.24B). 
The cervical pleurae, apices of the lung, and sympathetic 
trunks lie posterior to the ﬁ
 rst part of the arteries. The third 
part of the subclavian artery was discussed previously in this 
chapter.
The branches of the subclavian arteries are the:
• Vertebral artery, internal thoracic artery, and thyrocervi-
cal trunk from the ﬁ
 rst part of the subclavian artery.
• Costocervical trunk from the second part of the subcla-
vian artery.
• Dorsal scapular artery, often arising from the third part of 
the subclavian artery.
The cervical part of the vertebral artery arises from 
the ﬁ
 rst part of the subclavian artery and ascends in the pyra-
midal space formed between the scalene and longus muscles 
(colli and capitis) (Fig. 8.24). At the apex of this space, the 
artery passes deeply to course through the foramina trans-
versaria of vertebrae C1–C6. This is the vertebral part of 
the vertebral artery. Occasionally, the vertebral artery may 
enter a foramen more superior than vertebra C6. In approxi-
mately 5% of people, the left vertebral artery arises from the 
arch of the aorta.
The suboccipital part of the vertebral artery courses 
in a groove on the posterior arch of the atlas before it enters 
the cranial cavity through the foramen magnum. The cra-
nial part of the vertebral artery supplies branches to the 
medulla and spinal cord, parts of the cerebellum, and the 
dura of the posterior cranial fossa. At the inferior border of 
the pons of the brainstem, the vertebral arteries join to form 
the basilar artery, which participates in the formation of the 
cerebral arterial circle (see Chapter 7, p. 883).
The internal thoracic artery arises from the antero-
inferior aspect of the subclavian artery and passes infero-
medially into the thorax. The cervical part of the internal 
thoracic artery has no branches; its thoracic distribution is 
described in Chapter 1 (Figs. 1.14 and 1.15A, pp. 89–90).
