# Page 1039

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1009
short distance. However, when venous pressure rises (e.g., as 
in heart failure), the vein is prominent throughout its course 
along the side of the neck. Consequently, routine observation 
of the EJVs during physical examinations may give diagnostic 
signs of heart failure, SVC obstruction, enlarged supracla-
vicular lymph nodes, or increased intrathoracic pressure.
Severance of External Jugular Vein
If the EJV is severed along the posterior border of 
the SCM, where it pierces the roof of the lateral 
cervical region (e.g., by a knife slash), its lumen is 
held open by the tough investing layer of deep cervical fascia, 
and the negative intrathoracic pressure air will suck air into 
the vein. This action produces a churning noise in the thorax 
and cyanosis (a bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous 
membranes resulting from an excessive concentration of 
reduced hemoglobin in the blood). A venous air embolism 
produced in this way will ﬁ
 ll the right side of the heart with 
froth, which nearly stops blood ﬂ
 ow through it, resulting in 
dyspnea (shortness of breath). The application of ﬁ
 rm pres-
sure to the severed jugular vein until it can be sutured will 
stop the bleeding and entry of air into the blood.
Lesions of Spinal Accessory 
Nerve (CN XI)
Lesions of the spinal accessory nerve (CN XI) are 
uncommon. This nerve may be damaged by:
• Penetrating trauma, such as a stab or bullet wound.
• Surgical procedures in the lateral cervical region.
• Tumors at the cranial base or cancerous cervical lymph 
nodes.
• Fractures of the jugular foramen, where CN XI leaves the 
cranium.
Although contraction of one SCM turns the head to one 
side, a unilateral lesion of CN XI usually does not produce 
an abnormal position of the head. However, people with CN 
XI damage usually have weakness in turning the head to the 
opposite side against resistance. Lesions of the CN XI pro-
duce weakness and atrophy of the trapezius, impairing neck 
movements.
Unilateral paralysis of the trapezius is evident by the 
patient’s inability to elevate and retract the shoulder and by 
difﬁ
 culty in elevating the upper limb superior to the hori-
zontal level. The normal prominence in the neck produced 
by the trapezius is also reduced. Drooping of the shoulder is 
an obvious sign of CN XI injury. During extensive surgical 
dissections in the lateral cervical region—for example, dur-
ing removal of cancerous lymph nodes—the surgeon isolates 
CN XI to preserve it, if possible. An awareness of the super-
ﬁ
 cial location of this nerve during superﬁ
 cial procedures in 
the lateral cervical region is important because CN XI is the 
most commonly iatrogenic nerve injury (G. iatros, physician 
or surgeon).
Severance of Phrenic Nerve, Phrenic 
Nerve Block, and Phrenic Nerve Crush
Severance of a phrenic nerve results in paralysis of 
the corresponding half of the diaphragm (see the 
blue box “Paralysis of the Diaphragm” on p. 85). A 
phrenic nerve block produces a short period of paralysis of 
the diaphragm on one side (e.g., for a lung operation). The 
anesthetic is injected around the nerve where it lies on the 
anterior surface of the middle third of the anterior scalene 
muscle. A surgical phrenic nerve crush (e.g., compressing the 
nerve injuriously with forceps) produces a longer period of 
paralysis (sometimes for weeks after surgical repair of a dia-
phragmatic hernia). If an accessory phrenic nerve is present, 
it must also be crushed to produce complete paralysis of the 
hemidiaphragm.
Nerve Blocks in Lateral Cervical 
Region
For regional anesthesia before neck surgery, a cervi-
cal plexus block inhibits nerve impulse conduction. 
The anesthetic agent is injected at several points along 
the posterior border of the SCM, mainly at the junction of its 
superior and middle thirds, the nerve point of the neck (Figs. 8.8 
and 8.13A). Because the phrenic nerve supplying half the dia-
phragm is usually paralyzed by a cervical nerve block, this pro-
cedure is not performed on persons with pulmonary or cardiac 
disease. For anesthesia of the upper limb, the anesthetic agent 
in a supraclavicular brachial plexus block is injected around the 
supraclavicular part of the brachial plexus. The main injection 
site is superior to the midpoint of the clavicle.
Injury to Suprascapular Nerve
The suprascapular nerve is vulnerable to injury in 
fractures of the middle third of the clavicle. Injury 
to the suprascapular nerve results in loss of lateral 
rotation of the humerus at the glenohumeral joint. 
Consequently the relaxed limb rotates medially into the 
waiter’s tip position (see Fig. B6.12B, p. 729). The ability to 
initiate abduction of the limb is also affected.
Ligation of External Carotid Artery
Ligation of an external carotid artery is sometimes 
necessary to control bleeding from one of its relatively 
inaccessible branches. This procedure decreases 
blood ﬂ
 ow through the artery and its branches but does not 
eliminate it. Blood ﬂ
 ows in a retrograde (backward) direction 
into the artery from the external carotid artery on the other side 
through communications between its branches (e.g., those in 
the face and scalp) and across the midline. When the external 
carotid or subclavian arteries are ligated, the descending branch 
of the occipital artery provides the main collateral circulation, 
anastomosing with the vertebral and deep cervical arteries.
