# Page 1049

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1019
(A) Anterior view
Larynx
Sternohyoid muscle
(turned up)
Thyroid cartilage
Sternothyroid 
muscle
Esophagus
Trachea
Isthmus
Cricoid cartilage
Thyroid gland
(right lobe)
(B) Posterior view
Inferior view
Left parathyroid 
glands
Superior 
thyroid artery
Right
parathyroid 
glands
Common 
carotid 
artery
Internal
carotid 
artery
External
carotid 
artery
Recurrent 
laryngeal nerves 
Inferior thyroid
artery
Thyrocervical
trunk
(C) Transverse section at level indicated in part A
Sternohyoid 
Sternothyroid 
Sternocleidomastoid 
Pretracheal layer of deep cervical fascia 
(muscular and visceral layers)
Carotid sheath
Prevertebral layer of deep cervical fascia
Anterior scalene 
Thyroid gland
Trachea
Fibrous
capsule of
thyroid gland
Inferior
thyroid
artery
Esophagus
C7 vertebra
Omohyoid
Middle scalene 
Superior pole
Inferior poles
5
12
12
10
9
13
13
9
8
7
3
1
3
7
8
5
6
2
6
12
12
12
12
6
12
12
11
9
10
9
8
7
3
2
3
7
8
5
5
6
4
1
(D) Transverse CT scan through lobes of thyroid gland
(E) Transverse MRI study through thyroid isthmus
Inferior views
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12 
13
Esophagus
Trachea
Lobes of thyroid gland
Thyroid isthmus
SCM
Sternohyoid muscle
Common carotid 
artery
IJV
Vertebral artery
Vertebral body
Spinal cord
(surrounded by
cerebrospinal fluid in
subarachnoid space)
Deep muscles of 
back
Retropharyngeal
space
Endocrine layer
Respiratory layer
Alimentary layer
Layers of cervical viscera
11
11
FIGURE 8.26. Relationships of thyroid gland. A. The sternothyroid muscles have been cut to expose the lobes of the normal thyroid gland. The  
isthmus 
lies anterior to the second and third tracheal rings. B. The parathyroid glands are usually embedded in the ﬁ
 brous capsule on the posterior surface 
of the  
thyroid gland. C–E. The functional layers of the cervical viscera are indicated. The levels of the imaging studies are close to that shown in part C. 
(Part D courtesy of Dr. M. Keller, Medical Imaging, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Part E Courtesy of Dr. W. Kucharczyk, Professor 
and  
Neuroradiologist Senior Scientist, Department of Medical Resonance Imaging, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.)
