# Page 1101

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1071
VESTIBULOCOCHLEAR NERVE 
(CN VIII)
Functions: Special sensory (special somatic afferent)—that 
is, special sensations of hearing, equilibrium, and motion 
(acceleration/deceleration).
Nuclei: Vestibular nuclei are located at the junction of 
the pons and medulla in the lateral part of the ﬂ
 oor of the 4th 
ventricle; the cochlear nuclei, anterior and posterior, are in 
the medulla (Fig. 9.5).
The vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII) emerges from 
the junction of the pons and medulla and enters the internal 
acoustic meatus (Figs. 9.2 and 9.3). Here it separates into the 
vestibular and cochlear nerves (Fig. 9.12).
• The vestibular nerve is composed of the central pro-
cesses of bipolar neurons in the vestibular ganglion. 
Inferior view
Cochlea
Endolymphatic 
duct and sac
Semicircular
canals 
Squamous part of temporal bone
Petrous part
Mastoid part
Internal acoustic meatus
Petrosquamous fissure
Of temporal bone    
Lateral
Anterior 
Posterior
Vestibule
(A) Superior view
Foramen magnum
Semicircular ducts
Ampullae of semicircular ducts
Semicircular canals 
Vestibular
ganglion
Common
limb
Saccule
Vestibular nerve
Vestibulocochlear
nerve (CN VIII)
Cochlear nerve
Cochlea
Spiral canal—site of spiral organ 
Basal turn of cochlea
Lateral
Anterior 
Posterior
Utricle
Spiral ganglion
(B) Lateral view
Vestibulocochlear
nerve (CN VIII)
Membranous labyrinth (perilymph)
Bony labyrinth (endolymph)
FIGURE 9.12. Vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII). A. The internal surface of the cranial base shows the location of the bony labyrinth of the internal ear 
within the temporal bone. B. This view of the bony and membranous labyrinths shows (1) innervation of the cochlea by the cochlear nerve of CN VIII for the 
sense of hearing and (2) innervation of the vestibular apparatus by the vestibular nerve of CN VIII for equilibrium and motion.
