# Page 1071

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1041
or just inferior to the hyoid (Fig. B8.7A). Cystic remnants of the 
thyroglossal duct may be differentiated from an undescended 
thyroid by radioisotope scanning (Fig. B8.7B). As a rule, an 
ectopic thyroid gland in the median plane of the neck is the only 
thyroid tissue present. Occasionally, thyroid glandular tissue is 
associated with a thyroglossal duct cyst. Therefore, it is impor-
tant to differentiate between an ectopic thyroid gland and a 
thyroglossal duct cyst when excising a cyst. Failure to do so may 
result in a total thyroidectomy, leaving the person permanently 
dependent on thyroid medication (Leung et al., 1995).
Accessory Thyroid Glandular Tissue
Portions of the thyroglossal duct may persist to form 
thyroid tissue. Accessory thyroid glandular tissue 
may appear anywhere along the embryonic course 
neck inferior to the isthmus, because it is a potential source of 
bleeding (see the blue box “Tracheostomy,” p. 1045).
Thyroglossal Duct Cysts
Development of the thyroid gland begins in the 
ﬂ
 oor of the embryonic pharynx at the site indicated 
by a small pit, the foramen cecum, in the dorsum of 
the postnatal tongue (Chapter 7, p. 940). Subsequently, the 
developing gland relocates from the tongue into the neck, 
passing anterior to the hyoid and thyroid cartilages to reach 
its ﬁ
 nal position anterolateral to the superior part of the tra-
chea (Moore et al., 2012). During this relocation, the thyroid 
gland is attached to the foramen cecum by the thyroglossal 
duct. This duct normally disappears but remnants of epithe-
lium may remain and form a thyroglossal duct cyst at any 
point along the path of its descent (Fig. B8.6A). The cyst is 
usually in the neck, close or just inferior to the hyoid, and 
forms a swelling in the anterior part of the neck. Surgical 
excision of the cyst may be necessary. Most thyroglossal duct 
cysts are in the neck, close or just inferior to the body of the 
hyoid (Fig. B8.6B).
Aberrant Thyroid Gland
Aberrant thyroid glandular tissue may be found any-
where along the path of the embryonic thyroglossal 
duct. Although uncommon, the thyroglossal duct car-
rying thyroid-forming tissue at its distal end may fail to relocate 
to its deﬁ
 nitive position in the neck. Aberrant thyroid tissue 
may be in the root of the tongue, just posterior to the foramen 
cecum, resulting in a lingual thyroid gland, or in the neck, at 
External carotid
artery
Superior thyroid
artery
Inferior thyroid
artery
Thyrocervical
trunk
Brachiocephalic trunk
Arch of aorta
Left subclavian artery
Left common
carotid artery
Thyroid ima artery
Right 
subclavian artery
Isthmus of
thyroid gland
FIGURE B8.5.
Thyroglossal duct
Pyramidal lobe
Thyroid
gland
Thyroid
cartilage
Hyoid bone
Foramen
cecum
Tongue
Potential sites of
aberrant thyroid 
glandular tissue or 
thyroglossal duct cysts
(A)
Thyroglossal
duct cyst
(B)
FIGURE B8.6. A. Thyroglossal duct vestiges. B. Child with thyroglossal 
duct cyst.
