# Page 1070

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1040
The thyroid gland may be palpated by anterior or posterior 
approaches (i.e., standing in front of or behind the person). 
Place your ﬁ
 ngertips anterior (for the isthmus) or immedi-
ately lateral (for the lobes) to the trachea and then direct the 
person to swallow (see Bickley, 2009, for details). Although 
both approaches to examining the thyroid are performed, 
the pos 
terior approach usually allows better palpation, but 
the anterior approach allows observation. A perfectly nor-
mal thyroid gland may not be visible or distinctly palpable 
in some females, except during menstruation or pregnancy. 
The normal gland has the consistency of muscle tissue.
The isthmus of the thyroid gland lies immediately inferior 
to the cricoid cartilage; it extends approximately 1.25 cm on 
either side of the midline. It can usually be felt by placing the 
ﬁ
 ngertips of one hand on the midline below the cricoid arch 
and then asking the person to swallow. The isthmus will be 
felt moving up and then down. The apex of each lobe of the 
thyroid gland extends superiorly to the middle of the lamina 
of the thyroid cartilage (Fig. 8.50).
The surface anatomy of the posterior aspect of the neck is 
described in Chapter 4 (p. 492). Key points are the following:
• The spinous processes of the C6 and C7 vertebrae are pal-
pable and visible, especially when the neck is ﬂ
 exed.
• The transverse processes of the C1, C6, and C7 vertebrae 
are palpable.
• The tubercles of the C1 vertebra can be palpated by deep 
pressure posteroinferior to the tips of the mastoid processes.
trachea. The cricoid cartilage, a key landmark in the neck, 
indicates the:
• Level of the C6 vertebra.
• Site where the carotid artery can be compressed against 
the transverse process of the C6 vertebra.
• Junction of the larynx and trachea.
• Joining of the pharynx and esophagus.
• Point where the recurrent laryngeal nerve enters the larynx.
• Site that is approximately 3 cm superior to the isthmus of 
the thyroid gland.
The ﬁ
 rst tracheal cartilage is broader than the others and 
is palpable (Fig. 8.32A). The second through fourth carti-
lages cannot be felt because the thyroid isthmus connecting 
the right and left lobes of the thyroid covers them.
Opening of
pharyngo-
tympanic
tube
Pharyngeal 
tonsil
Tubal tonsil
Palatine tonsil
Lingual tonsil
Laryngeal inlet
Posterior view
Lymphatic
tissue in region
of pharyngeal
recess
Lymphatic
tissue along
salpingo-
pharyngeal folds
Root of tongue
(seen through
isthmus of 
fauces)
Choanae
FIGURE 8.49. Lymphoid tissue in tongue and pharynx. The pharyngeal 
lymphatic (tonsillar) ring (pink) around the superior pharynx is formed 
of the pharyngeal, tubal, palatine, and lingual tonsils.
H
T
T
P
H
C
*
*
S
RL
IP
IP
SP
SP
LL
C
LL
IP
H
P
SP
S
*
T
RL
Cricoid cartilage
Hyoid bone
Inferior pole of
thyroid gland
Left lobe of
thyroid gland
Thyroid cartilage
Tracheal rings
Isthmus
Superior pole of
thyroid gland
Right lobe of
thyroid gland
Laryngeal
prominence
FIGURE 8.50. Surface anatomy of endocrine and respiratory layers of 
neck.
VISCERA OF NECK
Thyroid Ima Artery
In approximately 10% of people, a small, unpaired 
thyroid ima artery (L. arteria thyroidea ima) arises 
from the brachiocephalic trunk (Fig. B8.5);  
however, 
it may arise from the arch of the aorta or from the right com-
mon carotid, subclavian, or internal thoracic arteries. This 
small ima artery ascends on the anterior surface of the trachea 
to the isthmus of the thyroid gland, supplying branches to 
both structures. The possible presence of this artery must be 
considered when performing procedures in the midline of the 
