# Page 1016

Chapter 8  •  Neck
986
Pharynx
Mandible
Hyoid
Larynx
Skin
Thyroid isthmus
Suprasternal space
Trachea
Esophagus
(A)  Medial view  
(B)  Superior view of transverse
section (at level C7 vertebra) 
(C)  Anterosuperior view of part B
Nuchal ligament
Vertebral arch of 
cervical vertebra
Trapezius
Middle scalene
Anterior scalene
Deep lymph
node
Longus colli
Alar fascia
Omohyoid 
Sternocleido-
mastoid (SCM)
Sternothyroid
Sternohyoid   
Platysma
Esophagus
Trachea
Thyroid gland
Retropharyngeal 
space
Carotid 
sheath
Carotid sheath
Internal jugular vein
Vagus nerve
Common carotid artery     
Skin 
Occipital bone
Body of vertebra
Intervertebral disc
Anterior longitudinal
ligament
Longus colli muscle
Prevertebral fascia
Retropharyngeal space
Buccopharyngeal fascia*
Pharyngeal muscle
Pharynx
Plane of section for parts B and C
Investing layer
 Posterior 
 Anterior
Pretracheal layer * 
Prevertebral layer 
Layers of deep cervical fascia
Alar fascia and carotid sheath 
*Buccopharyngeal fascia is a component of
  the pretracheal layer
Alar fascia
07
C7
Subcutaneous tissue of neck
(superficial cervical fascia)
Manubrium of sternum         
Fascial layers:
FIGURE 8.4. Sections of head and neck demonstrating cervical fascia. A. The right half of the head and neck have been sectioned in the median plane. 
The detail illustrates the fascia in the retropharyngeal region. B. This transverse section of the neck passes through the isthmus of the thyroid gland at the C7 
vertebral level, as indicated in part A. The outermost layer of deep cervical fascia, the investing layer, splits to enclose the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid 
(SCM) at the four corners of the neck. The investing layer and its embedded muscles surround two main fascial columns. The pretracheal (visceral) layer 
encloses muscles and viscera in the anterior neck; the prevertebral (musculoskeletal) layer encircles the vertebral column and associated muscles. The carotid 
sheaths are neurovascular conduits related to both fascial columns. C. The fascial compartments of the neck are shown to demonstrate an anterior midline 
approach to the thyroid gland. Although the larynx, trachea, and thyroid gland are nearly subcutaneous in the midline, two layers of deep cervical fascia (the 
investing and pretracheal layers) must be incised to reach them.
