# Page 1046

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1016
descends between the left common carotid and left subcla-
vian arteries and posterior to the SC joint to enter the thorax.
The recurrent laryngeal nerves arise from the vagus 
nerves in the inferior part of the neck (Fig. 8.25). The nerves 
of the two sides have essentially the same distribution; 
however, they loop around different structures and at dif-
ferent levels on the two sides. The right recurrent laryn-
geal nerve loops inferior to the right subclavian artery at 
approximately the T1–T2 vertebral level. The left recurrent 
laryngeal nerve loops inferior to the arch of the aorta at 
approximately the T4–T5 vertebral level. After looping, the 
NERVES IN ROOT OF NECK
There are three pairs of major nerves in the root of the neck: 
(1) vagus nerves, (2) phrenic nerves, and (3) sympathetic 
trunks.
Vagus Nerves (CN X). After its exit from the jugu-
lar foramen, each vagus nerve passes inferiorly in the neck 
within the posterior part of the carotid sheath in the angle 
between the IJV and common carotid artery (Figs. 8.21 and 
8.25). The right vagus nerve passes anterior to the ﬁ
 rst part 
of the subclavian artery and posterior to the brachiocephalic 
vein and SC joint to enter the thorax. The left vagus nerve 
Sympathetic trunk
Right recurrent laryngeal
nerve
Common carotid artery
Middle cervical ganglion
External carotid artery
and sympathetic 
peri-arterial plexus
Superior cervical 
ganglion
Internal carotid artery
and sympathetic
peri-arterial plexus
Sympathetic
trunk
Vagus nerve
Vertebral artery and 
sympathetic peri-arterial
plexus
Middle cervical
ganglion
Inferior 
cervical ganglion
(A) Lateral view
(B) Anterior view
Common carotid artery
Anterior scalene
Right recurrent
laryngeal nerve
1st part of subclavian artery
Internal jugular vein
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Prevertebral fascia
Thyroid branches of
inferior thyroid artery
Thyroid gland
Phrenic nerve
3rd part of
subclavian
artery
Subclavian
vein
Medial end of 
clavicle
FIGURE 8.25. Nerves in neck. A. The cervical sympathetic trunk and ganglia, the carotid arteries, and the sympathetic peri-arterial plexuses surrounding 
them are shown. B. In this view of the root of the neck (right side), the clavicle is removed and sections are taken from the common carotid artery and IJV. 
The right lobe of the thyroid gland is retracted to reveal the right recurrent laryngeal nerve and middle cervical (sympathetic) ganglion.
