# Page 1026

Chapter 8  •  Neck
996
the trapezius at the junction of its superior two thirds with its 
inferior one third.
The roots of the brachial plexus (anterior rami of C5–
C8 and T1) appear between the anterior and the middle sca-
lene muscles (Fig. 8.10). The ﬁ
 ve rami unite to form the three 
trunks of the brachial plexus, which descend inferolaterally 
through the lateral cervical region. The plexus then passes 
between the 1st rib, clavicle, and superior border of the scap-
ula (the cervico-axillary canal) to enter the axilla, providing 
innervation for most of the upper limb (see Chapter 6).
The suprascapular nerve, which arises from the superior 
trunk of the brachial plexus (not cervical plexus), runs laterally 
across the lateral cervical region to supply the supra 
spinatus 
and infraspinatus muscles on the posterior aspect of the scap-
ula. It also sends articular branches to the glenohumeral joint.
The anterior rami of C1–C4 make up the roots of the 
cervical plexus (Fig. 8.13). The cervical plexus consists of 
an irregular series of (primary) nerve loops and the branches 
that arise from the loops. Each participating ramus, except 
the ﬁ
 rst, divides into ascending and descending branches 
that unite with the branches of the adjacent spinal nerve 
to form the loops. The cervical plexus lies anteromedial to 
the levator scapulae and middle scalene muscles and deep 
to the SCM. The superﬁ
 cial branches of the plexus that ini-
tially pass posteriorly are cutaneous (sensory) branches (Fig. 
8.13A, C, & D). The deep branches passing anteromedially 
are motor branches, including the roots of the phrenic nerve 
(to the diaphragm) and the ansa cervicalis (Fig. 8.13A & B).
The superior root of the ansa cervicalis, conveying 
ﬁ
 bers from spinal nerves C1 and C2, brieﬂ
 y joins and then 
descends from the hypoglossal nerve (CN XII) as it traverses 
the lateral cervical region (Fig. 8.13). The inferior root of 
the ansa cervicalis arises from a loop between spinal nerves 
C2 and C3. The superior and inferior roots of the ansa cer-
vicalis unite, forming a secondary loop, the ansa cervica-
lis, consisting of ﬁ
 bers from the C1–C3 spinal nerves, which 
branch from the secondary loop to supply the infrahyoid 
muscles, including the omohyoid, sternothyroid, and sterno-
hyoid (Figs. 8.13, 8.14A, and 8.15). The fourth infrahyoid 
muscle, the thyrohyoid, receives C1 ﬁ
 bers, which descend 
independently from the hypoglossal nerve, distal to the 
superior root of the ansa cervicalis (nerve to thyrohyoid) 
(Figs. 8.13A & B and 8.14B).
Cutaneous branches of the cervical plexus emerge 
around the middle of the posterior border of the SCM, often 
called the nerve point of the neck (Fig. 8.8), and supply 
the skin of the neck, superolateral thoracic wall, and scalp 
between the auricle and the external occipital protuberance 
(Fig. 8.13 A, C, & D). Close to their origin, the roots of the 
cervical plexus receive gray rami communicantes, most of 
which descend from the large superior cervical ganglion in 
the superior part of the neck.
Branches of cervical plexus arising from the nerve loop 
between the anterior rami of C2 and C3 are the:
• Lesser occipital nerve (C2): supplies the skin of the 
neck and scalp posterosuperior to the auricle.
• Great auricular nerve (C2 and C3): ascends vertically 
across the oblique SCM to the inferior pole of the parotid 
gland, where it divides to supply the skin over—and the 
sheath surrounding—the gland, the mastoid process, and 
both surfaces of the auricle and an area of skin extending 
from the angle of the mandible to the mastoid process.
• Transverse cervical nerve (C2 and C3): supplies the 
skin covering the anterior cervical region. It curves around 
the middle of the posterior border of the SCM inferior to 
the great auricular nerve and passes anteriorly and hori-
zontally across it deep to the EJV and platysma, dividing 
into superior and inferior branches.
The branches of the cervical plexus arising from the nerve 
loop formed between the anterior rami of C3–C4 are the:
• Supraclavicular nerves (C3 and C4): emerge as a 
common trunk under cover of the SCM, sending small 
branches to the skin of the neck that cross the clavicle and 
supply the skin over the shoulder.
In addition to the ansa cervicalis and phrenic nerves arising from 
the loops of the plexus, deep motor branches of the cervical 
plexus include branches arising from the roots that supply the 
rhomboids (dorsal scapular nerve; C4 and C5), serratus anterior 
(long thoracic nerve; C5–C7), and nearby prevertebral muscles.
The phrenic nerves originate chieﬂ
 y from the C4 nerve 
but receive contributions from the C3 and C5 nerves (Figs. 
8.10 and 8.13A). The phrenic nerves contain motor, sensory, 
and sympathetic nerve ﬁ
 bers. These nerves provide the sole 
motor supply to the diaphragm as well as sensation to its central 
part. In the thorax, each phrenic nerve supplies the mediasti-
nal pleura and pericardium (see Chapter 1). Receiving variable 
communicating ﬁ
 bers in the neck from the cervical sympathetic 
ganglia or their branches, each phrenic nerve forms at the supe-
rior part of the lateral border of the anterior scalene muscle at 
the level of the superior border of the thyroid cartilage. The 
phrenic nerve descends obliquely with the IJV across the ante-
rior scalene, deep to the prevertebral layer of deep cervical fas-
cia and the transverse cervical and suprascapular arteries.
On the left, the phrenic nerve crosses anterior to the ﬁ
 rst 
part of the subclavian artery; on the right, it lies on the ante-
rior scalene muscle and crosses anterior to the second part of 
the subclavian artery. On both sides, the phrenic nerve runs 
posterior to the subclavian vein and anterior to the internal 
thoracic artery as it enters the thorax.
The contribution of the C5 nerve to the phrenic nerve may 
be derived from an accessory phrenic nerve (Fig. 8.10). 
Frequently, it is a branch of the nerve to the subclavius. If 
present, the accessory phrenic nerve lies lateral to the main 
nerve and descends posterior and sometimes anterior to 
the subclavian vein. The accessory phrenic nerve joins the 
phrenic nerve either in the root of the neck or in the thorax.
LYMPH NODES IN LATERAL CERVICAL REGION
Lymph from superﬁ
 cial tissues in the lateral cervical region 
enters the superﬁ
 cial cervical lymph nodes that lie along 
