# Page 1037

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1007
if distended by asking the person to take a deep breath and 
hold it, expiring against resistance (Valsalva maneuver) or by 
using gentle pressure on the inferior part of the vein. These 
actions impede venous return to the right side of the heart. 
The EJV is less obvious in children and middle-aged women 
because their subcutaneous tissues tend to be thicker than 
those in men.
The great auricular nerve parallels the EJV, approximately 
a ﬁ
 nger’s breadth posterior to the vein. Deep to the superior 
half of the SCM is the cervical plexus, and deep to the infe-
rior half of the SCM are the IJV, common carotid artery, and 
vagus nerve in the carotid sheath (Fig. 8.21).
The trapezius, which deﬁ
 nes the posterior cervical region, 
can be observed and palpated by asking the person to shrug the 
shoulders against resistance (Fig. 8.22B–D). Superiorly, infe-
rior to its attachment to the external occipital protuberance, 
the muscle overlies the suboccipital region (see Fig. 4.37).
The inferior belly of the omohyoid muscle can just barely 
be seen and palpated as it passes superomedially across the 
inferior part of the lateral cervical region. Easiest to observe 
in thin people, the omohyoid muscle can often be seen con-
tracting when they are speaking.
Just inferior to the inferior belly of the omohyoid is the 
greater supraclavicular fossa, the depression overlying the 
omoclavicular triangle (Fig. 8.22C & D). The third part of 
the subclavian artery passes through this triangle before 
coursing posterior to the clavicle and across the 1st rib. The 
greater supraclavicular fossa is clinically important because 
subclavian arterial pulsations can be palpated here in 
most people. The course of the subclavian artery in the neck 
is represented by a curved line from the sternoclavicular 
(SC) joint to the midpoint of the clavicle. To feel subclavian 
pulsations, press inferoposteriorly (down and back) imme-
diately posterior to the junction of the medial and middle 
thirds of the clavicle (Fig. 8.22E). This is the pressure point 
for the subclavian artery; ﬁ
 rmer pressure, compressing the 
artery against the 1st rib, can occlude the artery when hemor-
rhage is occurring distally in the upper limb.
The chief contents of the larger occipital triangle, superior 
to the omohyoid muscle, are the spinal accessory nerve (CN 
XI); cutaneous branches of cervical nerves C2, C3, and C4; 
and cervical lymph nodes. Because of the vulnerability and 
frequency of iatrogenic injury of the spinal accessory nerve, 
it is important to be able to estimate the location of CN XI in 
the lateral cervical region. Its course can be approximated by 
a line that intersects the junction of the superior and middle 
thirds of the posterior border of the SCM and the junction 
of the middle and lower thirds of the anterior border of the 
trapezius (Fig. 8.22C).
The cervical viscera and carotid arteries and their 
branches are approached surgically through the anterior cer-
vical region, between the anterior border of the SCM and the 
midline (Fig. 8.22B). Of the four smaller triangles into which 
this region is subdivided, the submandibular and carotid tri-
angles are especially important clinically.
The submandibular gland nearly ﬁ
 lls the submandibu-
lar triangle. It is palpable as a soft mass inferior to the body 
of the mandible, especially when the apex of the tongue is 
forced against the maxillary incisor teeth. The submandibular 
lymph nodes lie superﬁ
 cial to the gland (Fig. 8.14A). These 
nodes receive lymph from the face inferior to the eye and 
from the mouth. If enlarged, these nodes can be palpated by 
moving the ﬁ
 ngertips from the angle of the mandible along 
its inferior border (Figs. 8.22D and F). If continued until 
the ﬁ
 ngers meet under the chin, enlarged submental lymph 
nodes can be palpated in the submental triangle (Fig. 8.22B).
The carotid arterial system is located in the carotid tri-
angle. This area is important for surgical approaches to the 
carotid sheath containing the common carotid artery, IJV, and 
vagus nerve (Figs. 8.15 and 8.21). The carotid triangle also 
contains the hypoglossal nerve (CN XII) and cervical sympa-
thetic trunk. The carotid sheath can be marked out by a line 
joining the SC joint to a point midway between the mastoid 
process and the angle of the mandible. The carotid pulse 
can be palpated by placing the index and 3rd ﬁ
 ngers on the 
thyroid cartilage and pointing them posterolaterally between 
the trachea and SCM. The pulse is palpable just medial to the 
SCM. The palpation is performed low in the neck to avoid 
pressure on the carotid sinus, which could cause a reﬂ
 ex drop 
in blood pressure and heart rate (Figs. 8.17 and 8.22B).
SUPERFICIAL STRUCTURES 
OF NECK: CERVICAL REGIONS
Congenital Torticollis
Torticollis (L. tortus, twisted + L. collum, neck) is a 
contraction or shortening of the cervical muscles 
that produces twisting of the neck and slanting of the 
head. The most common type of torticollis (wry neck) results 
from a ﬁ
 brous tissue tumor (L. ﬁ
 bromatosis colli) that devel-
ops in the SCM before or shortly after birth. The lesion, like 
a normal unilateral SCM contraction, causes the head to tilt 
toward, and the face to turn away from, the affected side (Fig. 
B8.1). When torticollis occurs prenatally, the abnormal posi-
tion of the infant’s head usually necessitates a breech delivery.
Occasionally, the SCM is injured when an infant’s head 
is pulled too much during a difﬁ
 cult birth, tearing its ﬁ
 bers 
(muscular torticollis) (Kliegman et al., 2011). A hematoma 
(localized mass of extravasated blood) occurs that may 
develop into a ﬁ
 brotic mass that entraps a branch of the 
spinal accessory nerve (CN XI) and thus denervates part of 
the SCM. The stiffness and twisting of the neck results from 
ﬁ
 brosis and shortening of the SCM. Surgical release of the 
SCM from its inferior attachments to the manubrium and 
