# Page 1033

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1003
and scalp supplied by the supra-orbital artery are the major 
exceptions. There is some deep distribution as well (e.g., via 
the middle meningeal artery). Each external carotid artery 
runs posterosuperiorly to the region between the neck of the 
mandible and the lobule of the auricle, where it is embed-
ded in the parotid gland, and terminates by dividing into two 
branches, the maxillary artery and the superﬁ
 cial temporal 
artery (Fig. 8.19). Before these terminal branches, six arter-
ies arise from the external carotid artery:
1. Ascending pharyngeal artery: arises as the ﬁ
 rst or second 
branch of the external carotid artery and is its only medial 
branch. It ascends on the pharynx deep (medial) to the 
internal carotid artery and sends branches to the pharynx, 
prevertebral muscles, middle ear, and cranial meninges.
2. Occipital artery: arises from the posterior aspect of the 
external carotid artery, superior to the origin of the facial 
artery. It passes posteriorly, immediately medial and paral-
lel to the attachment of the posterior belly of the digastric 
muscle in the occipital groove in the temporal bone, and 
ends by dividing into numerous branches in the posterior 
part of the scalp. During its course, it passes superﬁ
 cial to 
the internal carotid artery and CN IX–CN XI.
3. Posterior auricular artery: a small posterior branch 
of the external carotid artery, which is usually the last 
pre 
terminal branch. It ascends posteriorly between the 
external acoustic meatus and mastoid process to supply 
the adjacent muscles; parotid gland; facial nerve; and 
structures in the temporal bone, auricle, and scalp.
4. Superior thyroid artery: the most inferior of the three 
anterior branches of the external carotid artery, runs 
antero-inferiorly deep to the infrahyoid muscles to reach 
the thyroid gland. In addition to supplying this gland, it 
gives off branches to the infrahyoid muscles and SCM and 
gives rise to the superior laryngeal artery, supplying the 
larynx.
5. Lingual artery: arises from the anterior aspect of the 
external carotid artery, where it lies on the middle pha-
ryngeal constrictor. It arches supero-anteriorly and passes 
deep to the hypoglossal nerve (CN XII), the stylohyoid 
muscle, and the posterior belly of the digastric muscle. 
It dis 
appears deep to the hyoglossus muscle, giving 
branches to the posterior tongue. It then turns superiorly 
at the anterior border of this muscle, bifurcating into the 
deep lingual and sublingual arteries.
Digastric, posterior belly
Superficial temporal
artery
Posterior 
auricular
artery
Occipital
artery
Internal carotid
artery
Ascending
pharyngeal artery
Carotid sinus
External carotid
artery
Right common 
carotid artery
Right subclavian 
artery
Sternoclavicular
(SC) joint
Brachiocephalic
trunk
Arch of aorta
Omohyoid
Left common 
carotid artery
Left subclavian
artery
Superior
laryngeal artery
Thyroid
cartilage
Superior thyroid
artery
Lingual artery
Facial artery
Tonsillar artery
Internal 
jugular
vein
Carotid 
sheath
Common
carotid
arteries
(A) Anterosuperior view of
      transverse section of lower neck
(B) Anterolateral view
Maxillary artery
Transverse facial artery
FIGURE 8.19. Subclavian and carotid arteries and their branches. A. The positions of the carotid sheaths are demonstrated. B. The muscles (posterior 
belly of the digastric and omohyoid muscles) indicate the superior and inferior boundaries of the carotid triangle.
