# Page 1005

Chapter 7  •  Head
975
be isolated (carved) from it using a dental drill. The otic cap-
sule is often erroneously illustrated and identiﬁ
 ed as being 
the bony labyrinth. However, the bony labyrinth is the ﬂ
 uid-
ﬁ
 lled space, which is surrounded by the otic capsule, and is 
most accurately represented by a cast of the otic capsule after 
removal of the surrounding bone.
Cochlea. The cochlea is the shell-shaped part of the 
bony labyrinth that contains the cochlear duct (Fig. 7.117C), 
the part of the internal ear concerned with hearing. The spi-
ral canal of the cochlea begins at the vestibule and makes 
2.5 turns around a bony core, the modiolus (Fig. 7.118), the 
cone-shaped core of spongy bone about which the spiral canal 
of the cochlea turns. The modiolus contains canals for blood 
vessels and for distribution of the branches of the cochlear 
nerve. The apex of the cone-shaped modiolus, like the axis of 
the tympanic membrane, is directed laterally, anteriorly, and 
inferiorly. The large basal turn of the cochlea produces the 
promontory of the labyrinthine wall of the tympanic cavity 
(Fig. 7.114B). At the basal turn, the bony labyrinth communi-
cates with the subarachnoid space superior to the jugular fora-
men through the cochlear aqueduct (Fig. 7.113B). It also 
features the round window (L. fenestra cochleae), closed by 
the secondary tympanic membrane (Fig. 7.117B & C).
Vestibule of Bony Labyrinth. The vestibule of the 
bony labyrinth is a small oval chamber (approximately 5 
mm long) that contains the utricle and saccule (Fig. 7.117C) 
and parts of the balancing apparatus (vestibular labyrinth). 
The vestibule features the oval window on its lateral wall, 
occupied by the base of the stapes. The vestibule is continu-
ous with the bony cochlea anteriorly, the semicircular canals 
posteriorly, and the posterior cranial fossa by the vestibu-
lar aqueduct (Fig. 7.113B). The aqueduct extends to the 
posterior surface of the petrous part of the temporal bone, 
where it opens posterolateral to the internal acoustic meatus 
(Fig. 7.117A). The vestibular aqueduct transmits the endo-
lymphatic duct (Figs. 7.113B and 7.117D) and two small 
blood vessels.
Semicircular Canals. The semicircular canals (ante-
rior, posterior, and lateral) communicate with the ves-
tibule of the bony labyrinth (Fig. 7.117B). The canals lie 
posterosuperior to the vestibule into which they open; they 
are set at right angles to each other. The canals occupy three 
planes in space. Each semicircular canal forms approxi-
mately two thirds of a circle, and is approximately 1.5 mm 
in diameter, except at one end where there is a swelling, the 
bony ampulla. The canals have only ﬁ
 ve openings into the 
vestibule because the anterior and posterior canals have one 
limb common to both. Lodged within the canals are the semi-
circular ducts (Fig. 7.117C & D).
MEMBRANOUS LABYRINTH
The membranous labyrinth consists of a series of commu-
nicating sacs and ducts that are suspended in the bony laby-
rinth (Fig. 7.117C). The labyrinth contains endolymph, a 
watery ﬂ
 uid similar in composition to intracellular ﬂ
 uid, thus 
differing in composition from the surrounding perilymph 
(which is like extracellular ﬂ
 uid) that ﬁ
 lls the remainder of the 
bony labyrinth. The membranous labyrinth—composed of 
two divisions, the vestibular labyrinth and the cochlear laby-
rinth—consists of more parts than does the bony labyrinth:
• Vestibular labyrinth: utricle and saccule, two small 
communicating sacs in the vestibule of the bony labyrinth.
• Three semicircular ducts in the semicircular canals.
• Cochlear labyrinth: cochlear duct in the cochlea.
The spiral ligament, a spiral thickening of the periosteal 
lining of the cochlear canal, secures the cochlear duct to the 
spiral canal of the cochlea (Fig. 7.118). The remainder of 
the membranous labyrinth is suspended by delicate ﬁ
 laments 
that traverse the perilymph.
The semicircular ducts open into the utricle through 
ﬁ
 ve openings, reﬂ
 ective of the way the surrounding semicir-
cular canals open into the vestibule. The utricle communi-
cates with the saccule through the utriculosaccular duct, 
from which the endolymphatic duct arises (Fig. 7.117D). 
The saccule is continuous with the cochlear duct through 
the ductus reuniens, a uniting duct. The utricle and saccule 
have specialized areas of sensory epithelium called maculae. 
The macula of the utricle (L. macula utriculi) is in the ﬂ
 oor 
of the utricle, parallel with the base of the cranium, whereas 
the macula of the saccule (L. macula sacculi) is vertically 
placed on the medial wall of the saccule. The hair cells in 
the maculae are innervated by ﬁ
 bers of the vestibular divi-
sion of the vestibulocochlear nerve. The primary sensory 
neurons are in the vestibular ganglia (Fig. 7.119), which 
are in the internal acoustic meatus.
The endolymphatic duct traverses the vestibular aqueduct 
(Fig. 7.113B) and emerges through the bone of the posterior 
cranial fossa, where it expands into a blind pouch called the 
endolymphatic sac (Figs. 7.113B, 7.117C and 7.119). The 
endolymphatic sac is located under the dura mater on the 
posterior surface of the petrous part of the temporal bone. 
The sac is a storage reservoir for excess endolymph, formed 
by the blood capillaries in the membranous labyrinth.
Semicircular Ducts. Each semicircular duct has an 
ampulla at one end containing a sensory area, the ampul-
lary crest (L. crista ampullari) (Fig. 7.119). The crests are 
sensors for recording movements of the endolymph in the 
ampulla resulting from rotation of the head in the plane of 
the duct. The hair cells of the crests, like those of the mac-
ulae, stimulate primary sensory neurons, whose cell bodies 
are in the vestibular ganglia.
Cochlear Duct. The cochlear duct is a spiral tube, 
closed at one end and triangular in cross section. The duct is 
ﬁ
 rmly suspended across the cochlear canal between the spiral 
ligament on the external wall of the cochlear canal (Fig. 7.118) 
and the osseous spiral lamina of the modiolus. Spanning the 
spiral canal in this manner, the endolymph-ﬁ
 lled cochlear duct 
divides the perilymph-ﬁ
 lled spiral canal into two channels that 
are continuous at the apex of the cochlea at the helicotrema, 
a semilunar communication at the apex of the cochlea.
