# Page 188

Chapter 1  •  Thorax
158
the ventricles will begin to contract independently at their own 
rate: 25–30 times per minute (much slower than the slowest nor-
mal rate (40–45 times per minute). The atria continue to contract 
at the normal rate if the SA node has been spared, but the impulse 
generated by the SA node no longer reaches the ventricles.
Damage to one of the bundle branches results in a bundle 
branch block, in which excitation passes along the un 
affected 
branch and causes a normally timed systole of that ventricle 
only. The impulse then spreads to the other ventricle via 
myogenic (muscle propagated) conduction, producing a late 
asynchronous contraction. In these cases, a cardiac pacemaker 
(artiﬁ
 cial heart regulator) may be implanted to increase the 
ventricular rate of contraction to 70–80 per minute.
With a VSD, the AV bundle usually lies in the margin of 
the VSD. Obviously, this vital part of the conducting sys-
tem must be preserved during surgical repair of the defect. 
Destruction of the AV bundle would cut the only physiologi-
cal link between the atrial and ventricular musculature, also 
producing a heart block as described above.
Artiﬁ
 cial Cardiac Pacemaker
In some people with a heart block, an artiﬁ
 cial car-
diac pacemaker (approximately the size of a pocket 
watch) is inserted subcutaneously. The pacemaker 
consists of a pulse generator or battery pack, a wire (lead), and 
an electrode. Pacemakers produce electrical impulses that ini-
tiate ventricular contractions at a predetermined rate. An elec-
trode with a catheter connected to it is inserted into a vein and 
P
R
Q
S
S-T
segment
T
QRS
complex
P-R
interval
Q-T
interval
Sinu-atrial
node
Common
AV bundle
(His)
Left
bundle
Right bundle 
Purkinje fibers
Atrio-
ventricular
node
(A) Electrocardiography (ECG)
(B) Relationship of electrocardiogram
to conducting system of heart
FIGURE B1.29. A. Electrocardiography (ECG). B. Relationship of electrocardiogram to conducting system of heart.
Right coronary
artery
SA node
AV bundle
AV node
AV nodal
branch
Left coronary
artery
Septal
arteries
Subendocardial
branches
Anterior branch
of left bundle
Right bundle
Anterior view
Posterior
branch
of left
bundle
SA nodal
artery
FIGURE B1.30. Blood supply of conducting system of heart. AV, atrio-
ventricular; SA, sinu-atrial.
 
contraction. Since the anterior IV branch (LAD) gives rise to the 
septal branches supplying the AV bundle in most people, and 
branches of the RCA supply both the SA and AV nodes 
(Figs. B1.30 and 1.59C), parts of the conducting system of the 
heart are likely to be affected by their occlusion, and a heart block 
may occur. In this case (if the patient survives the initial stages), 
