# Page 1080

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1050
veins, esophagus, and cervical region of the vertebral 
 
column.
• Zone III: occurs at the angles of the mandibles superi-
orly. Structures at risk are the salivary glands, oral and 
nasal cavities, oropharynx, and nasopharynx.
Injuries in zones I and III obstruct the airway and have the 
greatest risk for morbidity (complications following surgical 
procedures and other treatments) and mortality (a fatal out-
come) because the injured structures are difﬁ
 cult to visualize 
and repair and the vascular damage is difﬁ
 cult to control. 
Injuries in zone II are most common; however, morbidity 
and mortality are lower because physicians can control vas-
cular damage by direct pressure and surgeons can visualize 
and treat injured structures more easily than they can in the 
other zones.
Zone III
Zone II
Angle of
mandible
Zone I
Cricoid
cartilage
Clavicle
Manubrium
FIGURE B8.18. Zones of penetrating neck trauma.
VISCERA OF NECK
Endocrine layer of cervical viscera: Despite different 
develop 
mental origins, the endocrine thyroid and parathyroid 
glands are intimately related. ¨ Typically, the thyroid gland 
is roughly H-shaped, with right and left lobes linked by a thin 
central isthmus. ¨ The thyroid gland wraps around the anterior 
and lateral aspects of the trachea at the level of the second to 
fourth tracheal rings; the isthmus lies anterior to the second 
and third rings. ¨ Typically, there are four parathyroid glands 
(two superior and two inferior) within the capsule of the thyroid 
gland or in the gland itself. ¨ An abundant blood supply, essen-
tial to the endocrine function, is provided to the thyroid gland 
by a four-way anastomosis between the right and left superior 
and inferior thyroid arteries, with the latter usually providing 
branches to the parathyroid glands. ¨ Superior thyroid veins 
accompany the arteries of the same name, draining the area 
they supply. ¨ Unaccompanied middle and inferior thyroid veins 
drain the inferior part of the thyroid gland: The superior and 
middle thyroid veins drain to the IJV, whereas the usually singu-
lar inferior thyroid vein enters the left brachiocephalic vein. 
¨ Vasomotor nerves course along the arteries, but the glands are 
regulated hormonally rather than by secretomotor nerve ﬁ
 bers. 
¨ Lymphatic vessels pass directly to the deep cervical lymph 
nodes or via nodes associated with the larynx and trachea.
Respiratory layer of cervical viscera: The larynx is the 
superior end of the lower respiratory tract, modiﬁ
 ed to regu-
late entry into or close off the lower respiratory tract. ¨ The 
larynx also modiﬁ
 es the exit of air from the tract to produce 
tone for vocalization. ¨ With the diaphragm, it regulates intra-
abdominal pressure through air retention and the force and 
suddenness by which air exits the tract (e.g., exhaling verses 
coughing or sneezing). ¨ The larynx consists of a cartilaginous 
articulating skeleton joined by ligaments, membranes, and 
muscles, lined with mucous membrane. ¨ All the laryngeal 
muscles except one (posterior crico-arytenoid) participate in 
closure of the rima glottidis. ¨ Active opening of the rima is 
required only during deep inspiration. ¨ Otherwise, 
opening occurs passively by the tidal ﬂ
 ow of air, with the 
other muscles controlling the amount and nature of resistance 
provided at the rima glottidis to produce tone and control 
its pitch. ¨ In addition to intrinsically produced movements 
between its components, extrinsic musculature (hyoid mus-
cles) can move the entire larynx for swallowing and to modify 
pitch further. ¨ The internal laryngeal nerve, a branch of the 
superior laryngeal nerve, is the sensory nerve of the larynx. 
¨ The recurrent laryngeal nerve (via its terminal branch, the 
inferior laryngeal nerve) is the motor nerve, which supplies 
all muscles of the larynx, with one exception. ¨ The external 
laryngeal nerve, a smaller branch of the superior laryngeal 
nerve, supplies the cricothyroid muscle. ¨ The trachea is the 
median ﬁ
 bro 
cartilaginous tube extending between the cricoid 
cartilage at the C6 vertebral level and its bifurcation into main 
bronchi at the T4–T5 IV disc level (level of sternal angle).
Alimentary layer of cervical viscera: Although gener-
ally considered part of the alimentary tract, the pharynx is 
The Bottom Line
