# Page 1084

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
The regional aspects of the cranial nerves are described in the 
preceding chapters, especially those for the head and neck. 
This chapter summarizes all of the cranial nerves, largely in ﬁ
 g-
ures and tables. Figures 9.1–9.3 and Tables 9.1 and 9.2 summa-
rize speciﬁ
 c cranial nerves. Figure 9.4 and Table 9.3 summarize 
the cranial parasympathetic ganglia, their location, sympathetic 
and parasympathetic roots, and main distribution.
OVERVIEW
Like spinal nerves, cranial nerves are bundles of sensory or 
motor ﬁ
 bers that innervate muscles or glands, carry impulses 
from sensory receptors, or have a combination of motor and 
sensory ﬁ
 bers. They are called cranial nerves because they 
emerge through foramina or ﬁ
 ssures in the cranium and are 
covered by tubular sheaths derived from the cranial menin-
ges. There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves, which are num-
bered I–XII, from rostral to caudal (Figs. 9.1–9.3). Their 
names reﬂ
 ect their general distribution or function.
Cranial nerves carry one or more of the following ﬁ
 ve 
main functional components (Fig. 9.3, Table 9.1).
• Motor (efferent) ﬁ
 bers.
1. Motor ﬁ
 bers to voluntary (striated) muscle. These 
include the somatic motor (general somatic efferent) 
axons. On the basis of the embryologic/phylogenetic 
derivation of certain muscles of the head and neck,1 
some motor ﬁ
 bers conveyed by cranial nerves to 
striated muscle have traditionally been classiﬁ
 ed as 
“special visceral.” When appropriate, these ﬁ
 bers are 
designated somatic (branchial) motor, referring to the 
muscle tissue derived from the pharyngeal arches in 
the embryo (e.g., muscles of mastication).
2. Motor ﬁ
 bers involved in innervating involuntary 
(smooth) muscles or glands. These include visceral 
motor (general visceral efferent) axons that constitute 
the cranial outﬂ
 ow of the parasympathetic division of 
the autonomic nervous system (ANS). The presynap-
tic (preganglionic) ﬁ
 bers emerge from the brain and 
synapse outside the central nervous system (CNS) in a 
parasympathetic ganglion. The postsynaptic (postgan-
glionic) ﬁ
 bers continue to innervate smooth muscles 
and glands (e.g., the sphincter pupillae and lacrimal 
gland).
• Sensory (afferent) ﬁ
 bers.
3. Fibers transmitting general sensation (e.g., touch, 
pressure, heat, cold, etc.) from the skin and mucous 
membranes. These include somatic sensory (general 
somatic afferent) ﬁ
 bers, mainly carried by CN V, but 
also by CN VII, CN IX, and CN X.
4. Fibers conveying sensation from the viscera. These 
include visceral sensory (general visceral afferent) 
ﬁ
 bers conveying information from the carotid body and 
sinus (see Fig. 8.17), pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, 
lungs, heart, and gastrointestinal tract.
5. Fibers transmitting unique sensations. These include 
special sensory ﬁ
 bers conveying taste and smell (special 
visceral afferent ﬁ
 bers) and those serving the special 
senses of vision, hearing, and balance (special somatic 
afferent ﬁ
 bers).
Some cranial nerves are purely sensory, others are consid-
ered purely motor, and several are mixed. CN III, CN IV, 
CN VI, CN XI, CN XII, and the motor root of CN V are con-
sidered to be pure motor nerves that appear to have evolved 
from primordial anterior roots. However, a small number of 
sensory ﬁ
 bers for proprioception (nonvisual perception of 
movement and position) are also present in these nerves, the 
cell bodies of which are probably located in the mesence-
phalic nucleus of CN V. The sensory root of CN V is purely a 
somatic (general) sensory nerve. Four cranial nerves (CN III, 
CN VII, CN IX, and CN X) contain presynaptic parasympa-
thetic (visceral motor) axons as they emerge from the brain-
stem. CN V, CN VII, CN IX, and CN X are mixed nerves 
with both somatic (branchial) motor and somatic (general) 
sensory components, and each nerve supplies derivatives of 
a different pharyngeal arch.
The ﬁ
 bers of cranial nerves connect centrally to cranial 
nerve nuclei—groups of neurons in which sensory or affer-
ent ﬁ
 bers terminate and from which motor or efferent ﬁ
 bers 
originate (Fig. 9.5, see p. 1061). Except for CN I and CN II, 
which involve extensions of the forebrain, the nuclei of the 
cranial nerves are located in the brainstem. Nuclei of similar 
functional components (e.g., somatic or visceral motor, or 
somatic or visceral sensory) are generally aligned into func-
tional columns in the brainstem.
OLFACTORY NERVE (CN I)
Function: Special sensory (special visceral afferent)—that 
is, the special sense of smell. “Olfaction is the sensation of 
odors that results from the detection of odorous substances 
aerosolized in the environment” (Simpson, 2006).
The cell bodies of olfactory receptor neurons are located 
in the olfactory organ (the olfactory part of the nasal 
mucosa or olfactory area), which is located in the roof of the 
nasal cavity, and along the nasal septum and medial wall of 
the superior nasal concha (Fig. 9.6, see p. 1062). Olfactory 
receptor neurons are both receptors and conductors. The 
apical surfaces of the neurons possess ﬁ
 ne olfactory cilia, 
bathed by a ﬁ
 lm of watery mucus secreted by the olfactory 
glands of the epithelium. The olfactory cilia are stimulated 
by molecules of an odiferous gas dissolved in the ﬂ
 uid.
The basal surfaces of the bipolar olfactory receptor neurons 
of the nasal cavity of one side give rise to central processes that 
are collected into approximately 20 olfactory nerves (L. ﬁ
 la 
olfactoria), constituting the right or left olfactory nerve (CN I). 
1054
1Historically, the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius have been classiﬁ
 ed as 
branchiomeric muscles; students may see them classiﬁ
 ed as such in other 
references.
