# Page 1018

Chapter 8  •  Neck
988
Inferiorly between the sternal heads of the SCMs and just 
superior to the manubrium, the investing layer of deep cer-
vical fascia remains divided into two layers to enclose the 
SCM; one layer attaches to the anterior and the other to the 
posterior surface of the manubrium. A suprasternal space 
lies between these layers (Fig. 8.4A). It encloses the inferior 
ends of the anterior jugular veins, the jugular venous arch, 
fat, and a few deep lymph nodes.
PRETRACHEAL LAYER OF DEEP CERVICAL FASCIA
The thin pretracheal layer of deep cervical fascia is lim-
ited to the anterior part of the neck (Fig. 8.4). It extends 
inferiorly from the hyoid into the thorax, where it blends with 
the ﬁ
 brous pericardium covering the heart. The pretracheal 
layer of fascia includes a thin muscular part, which encloses 
the infrahyoid muscles, and a visceral part, which encloses 
the thyroid gland, trachea, and esophagus, and is continuous 
posteriorly and superiorly with the buccopharyngeal fascia 
of the pharynx. The pretracheal layer of deep fascia blends 
laterally with the carotid sheaths. Superior to the hyoid, a 
thickening of the pretracheal fascia forms a pulley or troch-
lea through which the intermediate tendon of the digastric 
muscle passes, suspending the hyoid. By wrapping around 
the lateral border of the intermediate tendon of the omohy-
oid, the pretracheal layer also tethers the two-bellied omo-
hyoid muscle, redirecting the course of the muscle between 
the bellies.
PREVERTEBRAL LAYER OF DEEP CERVICAL FASCIA
The prevertebral layer of deep cervical fascia forms 
a tubular sheath for the vertebral column and the muscles 
associated with it, such as the longus colli and longus capitis 
anteriorly, the scalenes laterally, and the deep cervical mus-
cles posteriorly (Fig. 8.4A & B).
The prevertebral layer of deep fascia is ﬁ
 xed to the cranial 
base superiorly. Inferiorly, it blends with the endothoracic 
fascia peripherally and fuses with the anterior longitudinal 
ligament centrally at approximately the T3 vertebra (see 
Chapter 4) (Fig. 8.4A). The prevertebral fascia extends 
 
laterally as the axillary sheath (Chapter 6), which surrounds 
the axillary vessels and brachial plexus. The cervical parts of 
the sympathetic trunks are embedded in the prevertebral 
layer of deep cervical fascia.
Carotid Sheath. The carotid sheath is a tubular fascial 
investment that extends from the cranial base to the root of 
the neck. This sheath blends anteriorly with the investing 
and pretracheal layers of fascia and posteriorly with the pre-
vertebral layer of fascia (Fig. 8.4B & C). The carotid sheath 
contains the:
• Common and internal carotid arteries.
• Internal jugular vein.
• Vagus nerve (CN X).
• Some deep cervical lymph nodes.
• Carotid sinus nerve.
• Sympathetic nerve ﬁ
 bers (carotid peri-arterial plexuses).
The carotid sheath and pretracheal fascia communicate 
freely with the mediastinum of the thorax inferiorly and the 
cranial cavity superiorly. These communications represent 
potential pathways for the spread of infection and extrava-
sated blood.
Retropharyngeal Space. The retropharyngeal space 
is the largest and most important interfascial space in the 
neck (Fig. 8.4A-C). It is a potential space that consists of 
loose connective tissue between the visceral part of the pre-
vertebral layer of deep cervical fascia and the buccopharyn-
geal fascia surrounding the pharynx superﬁ
 cially. Inferiorly, 
the buccopharyngeal fascia is continuous with the pretra-
cheal layer of deep cervical fascia.
The alar fascia forms a further subdivision of the retro-
pharyngeal space. This thin layer is attached along the mid-
line of the buccopharyngeal fascia from the cranium to the 
level of the C7 vertebra. From this attachment, it extends 
laterally and terminates in the carotid sheath. The retropha-
ryngeal space permits movement of the pharynx, esophagus, 
larynx, and trachea relative to the vertebral column during 
swallowing. This space is closed superiorly by the cranial base 
and on each side by the carotid sheath. It opens inferiorly 
into the superior mediastinum (see Chapter 1).
CERVICAL FASCIA
Paralysis of Platysma
Paralysis of the platysma, resulting from injury to the 
cervical branch of the facial nerve (Fig. 8.8), causes 
the skin to fall away from the neck in slack folds. 
Consequently, during surgical dissections of the neck, extra 
care is necessary to preserve the cervical branch of the facial 
nerve. When suturing wounds of the neck, surgeons carefully 
suture the skin and edges of the platysma. If this is not done, 
the skin wound will be distracted (pulled in different 
 
directions) by the contracting platysma muscle ﬁ
 bers, and an 
ugly scar may develop.
Spread of Infections in Neck
The investing layer of deep cervical fascia helps 
prevent the spread of abscesses (purulent infec-
tions) caused by tissue destruction. If an infection 
occurs between the investing layer of deep cervical fascia 
and the muscular part of the pretracheal fascia surround-
ing the infrahyoid muscles, the infection will usually not 
spread beyond the superior edge of the manubrium of the 
