# Page 1001

Chapter 7  •  Head
971
The ossicles are covered with the mucous membrane lining 
the tympanic cavity; but unlike other bones, they lack a sur-
rounding layer of osteogenic periosteum.
Malleus. The malleus (L. a hammer) attaches to the tym-
panic membrane. The rounded superior head of the mal-
leus lies in the epitympanic recess (Fig. 7.116B). The neck 
of the malleus lies against the ﬂ
 accid part of the tympanic 
membrane, and the handle of the malleus is embedded in 
the tympanic membrane, with its tip at the umbo; thus the 
malleus moves with the membrane. The head of the malleus 
articulates with the incus; the tendon of the tensor tympani 
inserts into its handle near the neck. The chorda tympani 
crosses the medial surface of the neck of the malleus. The 
malleus functions as a lever, with the longer of its two pro-
cesses and its handle attached to the tympanic membrane.
Incus. The incus (L. an anvil) is located between the malleus 
and the stapes and articulates with them. It has a body and two 
limbs. Its large body lies in the epitympanic recess (Fig. 7.116A), 
(A) Superomedial view
Tegmen tympani [tegmental wall
(roof) of tympanic cavity]
Mastoid antrum
Facial nerve
Jugular wall (floor)
of tympanic cavity
Superior bulb of internal jugular vein
Tympanic membrane 
forming membranous 
(lateral) wall
Internal carotid artery
*Opening of pharyngotympanic tube
in carotid (anterior) wall
*
Tensor tympani
Chorda tympani
Anterior
Posterior
Sigmoid sinus
Lesser petrosal nerve
Prominence of lateral 
semicircular canal
Facial nerve
Aditus to mastoid antrum 
(forming posterior wall)
Prominence of canal 
for facial nerve
Tympanic plexus on 
promontory of 
labyrinthine wall 
Stapedius
Pyramidal eminence
Tympanic nerve (from CN IX)
Tympanic 
membrane
Tensor tympani
Chorda tympani
Malleus
Stapes
Incus
Epitympanic recess
(B) Anterior view
Epitympanic recess
Aditus
     Tegmental wall (roof)
     Labyrinthine (medial) wall
     Membranous (lateral) wall
     Jugular wall (floor)
Mastoid (posterior) wall
Carotid (anterior) wall was
removed to provide this view
Walls of tympanic cavity:
FIGURE 7.114. Walls of tympanic cavity. A. This specimen was dissected with a drill from the medial aspect. The tegmen tympani, forming the roof of 
the tympanic cavity and the mastoid antrum, is fairly thick in this specimen; usually it is extremely thin. The internal carotid artery is the main relation of 
the anterior wall, the internal jugular vein is the main relation of the ﬂ
 oor, and the facial nerve (CN VII) is a main feature of the posterior wall. The chorda 
tympani passes between the malleus and the incus. B. In this view of the middle ear, the carotid (anterior) wall of the tympanic cavity has been removed. The 
tympanic membrane forms most of the membranous (lateral) wall; superior to it is the epitympanic recess, in which are housed the larger parts of the mal-
leus and incus. Branches of the tympanic plexus provide innervation to the mucosa of the middle ear and adjacent pharyngotympanic tube; but one branch, 
the lesser petrosal nerve, is conveying presynaptic parasympathetic ﬁ
 bers to the otic ganglion for secretomotor innervation of the parotid gland.
