# Page 1017

Chapter 8  •  Neck
987
Acting from its superior attachment to the mandible, the pla-
tysma tenses the skin, producing vertical skin ridges and releas-
ing pressure on the superﬁ
 cial veins (Table 8.2). Men commonly 
use actions of the platysma when shaving their necks and when 
easing tight collars. Acting from its inferior attachment, the pla-
tysma helps depress the mandible and draw the corners of the 
mouth inferiorly, as in a grimace. As a muscle of facial expres-
sion, the platysma serves to convey tension or stress.
Deep Cervical Fascia
The deep cervical fascia consists of three fascial layers 
(sheaths): investing, pretracheal, and prevertebral (Fig. 8.4A 
& B). These layers support the cervical viscera (e.g., thyroid 
gland), muscles, vessels, and deep lymph nodes. The deep 
cervical fascia also condenses around the common carotid 
arteries, internal jugular veins (IJVs), and vagus nerves to 
form the carotid sheath (Fig. 8.4B & C).
These three fascial layers form natural cleavage planes 
through which tissues may be separated during surgery, 
and they limit the spread of abscesses (collections of pus) 
resulting from infections. The deep cervical fascial layers also 
afford the slipperiness that allows structures in the neck to 
move and pass over one another without difﬁ
 culty, such as 
when swallowing and turning the head and neck.
INVESTING LAYER OF DEEP CERVICAL FASCIA
The investing layer of deep cervical fascia, the most super-
ﬁ
 cial deep fascial layer, surrounds the entire neck deep to the 
skin and subcutaneous tissue. At the “four corners” of the neck, 
it splits into superﬁ
 cial and deep layers to enclose (invest) the 
trapezius and sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscles (Fig. 8.4B & 
C). These muscles are derived from the same embryonic sheet 
of muscle and are innervated by the same nerve (CN XI). They 
have essentially continuous attachments to the cranial base supe-
riorly and to the scapular spine, acromion, and clavicle inferiorly.
Superiorly, the investing layer of deep cervical fascia 
attaches to the:
• Superior nuchal lines of the occipital bone.
• Mastoid processes of the temporal bones.
• Zygomatic arches.
• Inferior border of the mandible.
• Hyoid bone.
• Spinous processes of the cervical vertebrae.
Just inferior to its attachment to the mandible, the invest-
ing layer of deep fascia splits to enclose the submandibular 
gland; posterior to the mandible, it splits to form the ﬁ
 brous 
capsule of the parotid gland. The stylomandibular ligament 
is a thickened modiﬁ
 cation of this fascial layer (see Fig. 7.69).
Inferiorly, the investing layer of deep cervical fascia 
attaches to the manubrium of the sternum, clavicles, and 
acromions and spines of the scapulae. The investing layer of 
deep cervical fascia is continuous posteriorly with the perios-
teum covering the C7 spinous process, and with the nuchal 
ligament (L. ligamentum nuchae), a triangular membrane 
that forms a median ﬁ
 brous septum between the muscles of 
the two sides of the neck (Fig. 8.4B).
Mentalis
Depressor labii
inferioris
Depressor anguli oris
Supraclavicular nerves
(C3 and C4)
Branches of transverse 
cervical nerve (C2 and C3)
Platysma
Clavicle deep 
to platysma
Deep fascia
FIGURE 8.5. Platysma. The thin platysma muscle spreads subcutaneously like a sheet, passes over the clavicles, and is pierced by cutaneous nerves. Much 
variation is present in the continuity of this muscular sheet.
