# Page 1098

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1068
ABDUCENT NERVE (CN VI)
Functions: Somatic motor (general somatic efferent) to one 
extra-ocular muscle, the lateral rectus.
Nucleus: The abducent nucleus is in the pons near the 
median plane (Fig. 9.5).
The abducent nerve (CN VI) emerges from the brain-
stem between the pons and the medulla and traverses the pon-
tine cistern of the subarachnoid space, the right and left nerves 
straddling the basilar artery (Figs. 9.3 and 9.8). Each abdu-
cent nerve then pierces the dura to run the longest intradural 
course within the cranial cavity of all the cranial nerves—that 
is, its point of entry into the dura mater covering the clivus is 
the most distant from its exit from the cranium via the superior 
orbital ﬁ
 ssure. During its intradural course, it bends sharply 
over the crest of the petrous part of the temporal bone and 
then courses through the cavernous sinus, surrounded by the 
venous blood in the same manner as the internal carotid artery, 
which it parallels in the sinus. CN VI traverses the common 
tendinous ring (L. anulus tendineus communis) as it enters the 
orbit (see Chapter 7), running on and penetrating the medial 
surface of the lateral rectus, which abducts the pupil.
ﬁ
 bers. During its course, CN VII traverses the posterior cra-
nial fossa, internal acoustic meatus, facial canal, stylomastoid 
foramen of the temporal bone, and parotid gland. After tra-
versing the internal acoustic meatus, the nerve proceeds a 
short distance anteriorly within the temporal bone and then 
turns abruptly posteriorly to course along the medial wall of 
the tympanic cavity. The sharp bend, the geniculum of the 
facial nerve (L. genu, knee) is the site of the geniculate 
ganglion, the sensory ganglion of CN VII (Fig. 9.10). While 
traversing the temporal bone within the facial canal, CN VII 
gives rise to the:
• Greater petrosal nerve.
• Nerve to the stapedius.
• Chorda tympani nerve.
Then, after running the longest intra-osseous course of any 
cranial nerve, CN VII emerges from the cranium via the sty-
lomastoid foramen; gives off the posterior auricular branch; 
enters the parotid gland; and forms the parotid plexus, which 
gives rise to the following ﬁ
 ve terminal motor branches: tem-
poral, zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, and cervical.
Somatic (Branchial) Motor
As the nerve of the 2nd pharyngeal arch, the facial nerve 
supplies striated muscles derived from its mesoderm, mainly 
the muscles of facial expression and auricular muscles. It also 
supplies the posterior bellies of the digastric, stylohyoid, and 
stapedius muscles.
Visceral (Parasympathetic) Motor
The visceral (parasympathetic) motor distribution of the facial 
nerve is presented in Figure 9.11. CN VII provides presynap-
tic parasympathetic ﬁ
 bers to the pterygopalatine ganglion for 
innervation of the lacrimal glands and to the sub 
mandibular 
ganglion for innervation of the sublingual and submandibu-
lar salivary glands. The pterygopalatine ganglion is associated 
with the maxillary nerve (CN V2), which distributes its post-
synaptic ﬁ
 bers, whereas the submandibular ganglion is asso-
ciated with the mandibular nerve (CN V3). The main features 
of the parasympathetic ganglia supplied by the facial nerve 
and other cranial nerves are summarized in Figure 9.4 and 
Table 9.3. Parasympathetic ﬁ
 bers synapse in these ganglia, 
whereas sympathetic and other ﬁ
 bers pass through them.
Somatic (General) Sensory
Some ﬁ
 bers from the geniculate ganglion supply a small 
area of the skin of the concha of the auricle, close to external 
acoustic meatus.
Special Sensory (Taste)
Fibers carried by the chorda tympani join the lingual nerve
of CN V3 to convey taste sensation from the anterior two 
thirds of the tongue and soft palate (Fig. 9.10).
ABDUCENT NERVE
¨ The abducent nerves (CN VI) supply somatic motor ﬁ
 bers 
to the lateral rectus muscles of the eyeballs. ¨ The nerves 
originate from the pons, pierce the dura mater on the clivus, 
traverse the cavernous sinuses and superior orbital ﬁ
 ssures, 
and enter the orbits.
The Bottom Line
FACIAL NERVE (CN VII)
Functions: Sensory—special sensory (taste) and somatic 
(general) sensory. Motor—somatic (branchial) motor and 
visceral (parasympathetic) motor. It also carries propriocep-
tive ﬁ
 bers from the muscles it innervates.
Nuclei: The motor nucleus of the facial nerve is a bran-
chiomotor nucleus in the ventrolateral part of the pons (Fig. 
9.5). The cell bodies of the primary sensory neurons are in 
the geniculate ganglion (Fig. 9.10B). The central processes of 
those concerned with taste end in the nuclei of the solitary tract 
in the medulla. The processes of those concerned with general 
sensations (pain, touch, and thermal) from around the external 
ear end in the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve (Fig. 9.5).
The facial nerve (CN VII) emerges from the junction 
of the pons and medulla as two divisions: the primary root 
and the intermediate nerve. The larger primary root (facial 
nerve proper) innervates the muscles of facial expression, 
and the smaller intermediate nerve (L. nervus interme-
dius) carries taste, parasympathetic, and somatic sensory 
