# Page 1074

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1044
raised peripheral venous pressure and decreased cardiac ﬁ
 ll-
ing and cardiac output.
Aspiration of Foreign Bodies 
and Heimlich Maneuver
A foreign object, such as a piece of steak, may acci-
dentally aspirate (be inhaled into the airways) 
through the laryngeal inlet into the vestibule of the 
larynx, where it becomes trapped superior to the vestibular 
folds. When a foreign object enters the vestibule of the lar-
ynx, the laryngeal muscles go into spasm, tensing the vocal 
during thyroidectomy, surgeons usually preserve the poste-
rior part of the lobes of the thyroid gland.
In cases in which it is necessary to remove the whole 
thyroid gland (e.g., because of malignant disease), the para-
thyroid glands are carefully isolated with their blood vessels 
intact before removal of the thyroid gland. Parathyroid tissue 
may also be transplanted, usually to the arm, so it will not be 
damaged by subsequent surgery or radiation therapy.
Fractures of Laryngeal Skeleton
Laryngeal fractures may result from blows received 
in sports, such as kick boxing and hockey, or from 
compression by a shoulder strap during an automo-
bile accident. Because of the frequency of this type of injury, 
most goalies in ice hockey and catchers in baseball have pro-
tective guards hanging from their masks that cover their 
larynges. Laryngeal fractures produce submucous hemor-
rhage and edema, respiratory obstruction, hoarseness, and 
sometimes a temporary inability to speak.
Laryngoscopy
Laryngoscopy is the procedure used to examine the 
interior of the larynx. The larynx may be examined 
visually by indirect laryngoscopy using a laryngeal 
mirror (Fig. B8.11A). The anterior part of the tongue is gen-
tly pulled from the oral cavity to minimize the extent to which 
the posterior part of the tongue covers the epiglottis and 
laryngeal inlet. Because the rima vestibuli is larger than the 
rima glottidis during normal respiration, the vestibular folds 
and vocal folds are visible during a laryngoscopic exami 
nation 
(Fig. B8.11B). The larynx can also be viewed by direct laryn-
goscopy, using a tubular endoscopic instrument, a laryngo-
scope. A laryngoscope is a tube or ﬂ
 exible ﬁ
 ber optic 
endoscope equipped with electrical lighting for examining or 
operating on the interior of the larynx through the mouth. 
The vestibular folds normally appear pink, whereas the vocal 
folds are usually pearly white.
Valsalva Maneuver
The sphincteric actions of the vestibular and vocal 
folds are important during the Valsalva maneuver, 
any forced expiratory effort against a closed airway, 
such as a cough, sneeze, or strain during a bowel movement 
or weight lifting. The vestibular and vocal folds abduct widely 
as the lungs inﬂ
 ate during deep inspiration. In the Valsalva 
maneuver, both the vestibular and vocal folds are tightly 
adducted at the end of deep inspiration. The anterolateral 
abdominal muscles then contract strongly to increase the 
intrathoracic and intra-abdominal pressures. The relaxed 
diaphragm passively transmits the increased abdominopelvic 
pressure to the thoracic cavity. Because high intrathoracic 
pressure impedes venous return to the right atrium, the 
Valsalva maneuver is used to study cardiovascular effects of 
Laryngeal mirror
(A) Indirect laryngoscopy
Dorsum of tongue
Right and left valleculae
Median glosso-epiglottic
fold
Epiglottis
Vestibular folds
(medial edge)
Lateral walls of laryngeal
vestibule (mucosa over
quadrangular membrane)
Vocal folds
Trachea
Ary-epiglottic fold
Site of cuneiform cartilages
Site of corniculate
cartilages
Interarytenoid notch
Mucosa over cricoid
cartilage
Piriform fossa (recess)
To esophagus
Posterior wall of laryngopharynx
(B)
FIGURE B8.11.
