# Page 1019

Chapter 8  •  Neck
989
sternum. If, however, the infection occurs between the 
investing fascia and the visceral part of pretracheal fascia, 
it can spread into the thoracic cavity anterior to the peri-
cardium.
Pus from an abscess posterior to the prevertebral layer 
of deep cervical fascia may extend laterally in the neck and 
form a swelling posterior to the SCM. The pus may perfo-
rate the prevertebral layer of deep cervical fascia and enter 
the retropharyngeal space, producing a bulge in the pharynx 
(retropharyngeal abscess). This abscess may cause difﬁ
 culty 
in swallowing (dysphagia) and speaking (dysarthria).
Infections in the head may also spread inferiorly posterior 
to the esophagus and enter the posterior mediastinum, or 
it may spread anterior to the trachea and enter the anterior 
mediastinum. Infections in the retropharyngeal space may 
also extend inferiorly into the superior mediastinum. Simi-
larly, air from a ruptured trachea, bronchus, or esophagus 
(pneumomediastinum) can pass superiorly in the neck.
CERVICAL FASCIA
Cervical subcutaneous tissue and platysma: The subcu-
taneous tissue (superﬁ
 cial cervical fascia) is usually thinner in 
the neck than in other regions, especially anteriorly. ¨ It con-
tains the platysma, a muscle of facial expression.
Deep cervical fascia: Like deep fascia elsewhere, the 
function of the deep cervical fascia is (1) to provide contain-
ment of muscles and viscera in compartments with varying 
degrees of rigidity, (2) to provide the slipperiness that allows 
structures to slide over each other, and (3) to serve as a 
conduit for the passage of neurovascular structures. ¨ Two 
major fascial compartments of the neck are separated by the 
retropharyngeal space. ¨ Anteriorly, the pretracheal fascia 
surrounds the cervical viscera and extrinsic musculature asso-
ciated with it (suprahyoid and infrahyoid muscles). ¨ Poste-
riorly, the prevertebral fascia surrounds the musculoskeletal 
elements of the neck associated with and including the cervical 
vertebrae. ¨ These two fascial compartments are contained 
within the third and most superﬁ
 cial layer of deep cervical fas-
cia, the investing layer, which includes the superﬁ
 cial muscles 
(trapezius and SCM). ¨ The investing fascia attaches to the 
cranium superiorly and the pectoral girdle inferiorly. ¨ Lying 
anterolateral at the common junctions of these three layers 
are the major neurovascular conduits, the carotid sheaths. 
¨ The superior and inferior boundaries and continuities of these 
fascial layers, compartments, and interfascial spaces establish 
pathways for the spread of infection, ﬂ
 uid, gas, or tumors.
The Bottom Line
SUPERFICIAL STRUCTURES OF 
NECK: CERVICAL REGIONS
To allow clear communication regarding the location of 
structures, injuries, or pathologies, the neck is divided into 
regions (Fig. 8.6; Table 8.1). Between the cranium (mandible 
anteriorly and occipital bone posteriorly) and clavicles, the 
neck is divided into four major regions based on the usu-
ally visible and/or palpable borders of the large and relatively 
superﬁ
 cial SCM and trapezius muscles, which are contained 
within the outermost (investing) layer of deep cervical fascia.
Sternocleidomastoid Region
The sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle is a key muscu-
lar landmark in the neck, forming the sternocleidomastoid 
region. The SCM visibly divides each side of the neck into 
the anterior and lateral cervical regions (anterior and poste-
rior triangles). The SCM is a broad, strap-like muscle that has 
two heads: the rounded tendon of the sternal head attaches 
to the manubrium, and the thick, ﬂ
 eshy clavicular head
attaches to the superior surface of the medial third of the 
clavicle (Figs. 8.6 and 8.7; Table 8.2).
The two heads of the SCM are separated inferiorly by a 
space, visible superﬁ
 cially as a small triangular depression, 
the lesser supraclavicular fossa (Fig. 8.6B). The heads 
join superiorly as they pass obliquely upward toward the cra-
nium. The superior attachment of the SCM is the mastoid 
process of the temporal bone and the superior nuchal line of 
the occipital bone. The investing layer of deep cervical fascia 
splits to form a sheath for the SCM (Fig. 8.4B).
The SCMs produce movement at the craniovertebral joints, 
the cervical intervertebral joints, or at both (Fig. 8.7; Table 8.2). 
The cranial attachments of the SCMs lie posterior to the axis 
of the atlanto-occipital (AO) joints. Starting from the anatomi-
cal position, with tonic contraction maintaining the position of 
the cervical vertebral column, bilateral contraction of the SCMs 
(especially their more posterior ﬁ
 bers) will cause extension of 
the head at the AO joints, elevating the chin (Fig. 8.7D).
Acting bilaterally, the SCMs can also ﬂ
 ex the neck. They 
can do this in two different ways:
1. If initially the head is ﬂ
 exed anteriorly at the AO joints 
by the prevertebral muscles (and/or the suprahyoid and 
infrahyoid muscles) against resistance, the SCMs (espe-
cially the anterior ﬁ
 bers) ﬂ
 ex the entire cervical vertebral 
(text continues on p. 992)
