# Page 1034

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1004
6. Facial artery: arises anteriorly from the external carotid 
artery, either in common with the lingual artery or imme-
diately superior to it (Figs. 8.15 and 8.19). After giving rise 
to the ascending palatine artery and a tonsillar artery, the 
facial artery passes superiorly under cover of the digastric 
and stylohyoid muscles and the angle of the mandible. It 
loops anteriorly and enters a deep groove in and supplies 
the submandibular gland. It then gives rise to the submen-
tal artery to the ﬂ
 oor of the mouth and hooks around the 
middle of the inferior border of the mandible to enter the 
face.
Memory device for the six branches of the carotid artery: 
1-2-3—one branch arises medially (ascending pharyngeal), 
two branches arise posteriorly (occipital and posterior auric-
ular), and three branches arise anteriorly (superior thyroid, 
lingual, and facial).
VEINS IN ANTERIOR CERVICAL REGION
Most veins in the anterior cervical region are tributaries of 
the IJV, typically the largest vein in the neck (Figs. 8.15 and 
8.20). The IJV drains blood from the brain, anterior face, 
 
cervical viscera, and deep muscles of the neck. It commences 
at the jugular foramen in the posterior cranial fossa as the 
direct continuation of the sigmoid sinus (see Chapter 7).
From a dilation at its origin, the superior bulb of the 
IJV, the vein descends in the carotid sheath (Fig. 8.19A), 
accompanying the internal carotid artery superior to the 
carotid bifurcation and the common carotid artery and vagus 
nerve inferiorly (Fig. 8.20). The vein lies laterally within the 
carotid sheath, with the nerve located posteriorly.
The cervical sympathetic trunk lies posterior to the carotid 
sheath. Although closely related, the trunk is not within the 
sheath; instead, it is embedded in the prevertebral layer of 
deep cervical fascia. The IJV leaves the anterior cervical region 
by passing deep to the SCM. The inferior end of the vein passes 
deep to the gap between the sternal and clavicular heads of 
this muscle. Posterior to the sternal end of the clavicle, the IJV 
merges with the subclavian vein to form the brachiocephalic 
vein. The inferior end of the IJV dilates to form the inferior 
bulb of the IJV. This bulb has a bicuspid valve that permits 
blood to ﬂ
 ow toward the heart while preventing backﬂ
 ow into 
the vein, as might occur if inverted (e.g., standing on one’s 
head or when intrathoracic pressure is increased).
The tributaries of the IJV are the inferior petrosal sinus 
and the facial and lingual (often by a common trunk), pha-
ryngeal, and superior and middle thyroid veins. The occipi-
tal vein usually drains into the suboccipital venous plexus, 
drained by the deep cervical vein and the vertebral vein, but 
it may drain into the IJV.
Occipital vein
External jugular 
vein (EJV)
Subclavian vein
Right brachiocephalic vein
Internal jugular vein (IJV)  
Superior bulb of IJV
Termination of
sigmoid sinus
Inferior petrosal
sinus
Pharyngeal veins
Facial vein
Lingual vein
Superior
Middle
Inferior bulb and valve of IJV
Anterior jugular vein
Inferior thyroid vein
Thyroid 
vein
Left brachiocephalic vein
Superior vena cava  
External acoustic 
meatus
Sternoclavicular joint
FIGURE 8.20. Internal jugular 
vein. The IJV is the main venous 
 
structure in the neck. It originates as a 
 
continuation of the S-shaped sigmoid 
(dural venous) sinus. As it descends in 
the neck, it is contained in the carotid 
sheath. It terminates at the T1 verte-
bral level, superior to the sternoclavicu-
lar joint, by uniting with the subclavian 
vein to form the brachiocephalic vein. 
A large valve near its termination 
 
prevents reﬂ
 ux of blood into the vein.
