# Page 1057

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1027
which pull the muscular processes anteriorly, rotating the 
arytenoid cartilages so that their vocal processes swing 
medially. When this action is combined with that of the 
transverse and oblique arytenoid muscles, which pull 
the arytenoid cartilages together, air pushed through the 
rima glottidis causes vibrations of the vocal ligaments 
voice. The lower range of pitch of the voice of postpubertal 
males results from the greater length of the vocal folds.
The vestibular folds, extending between the thyroid and 
the arytenoid cartilages (Figs. 8.34 and 8.35), play little or 
no part in voice production; they are protective in function. 
They consist of two thick folds of mucous membrane enclos-
ing the vestibular ligaments. The space between these liga-
ments is the rima vestibuli. The lateral recesses between 
the vocal and the vestibular folds are the laryngeal ventricles.
Laryngeal Muscles. The laryngeal muscles are divided 
into extrinsic and intrinsic groups.
• Extrinsic laryngeal muscles move the larynx as a whole 
(Fig. 8.18; Table 8.3). The infrahyoid muscles are depres-
sors of the hyoid and larynx, whereas the suprahyoid muscles 
(and the stylopharyngeus, a pharyngeal muscle discussed 
later in this chapter) are elevators of the hyoid and larynx.
• Intrinsic laryngeal muscles move the laryngeal com-
ponents, altering the length and tension of the vocal folds 
and the size and shape of the rima glottidis (Fig. 8.36). 
All but one of the intrinsic muscles of the larynx are sup-
plied by the recurrent laryngeal nerve (Figs. 8.37, 8.39, 
and 8.40), a branch of CN X. The cricothyroid is supplied 
by the external laryngeal nerve, one of the two terminal 
branches of the superior laryngeal nerve.
The actions of the intrinsic laryngeal muscles are easiest to 
understand when they are considered as functional groups: 
adductors and abductors, sphincters, and tensors and relax-
ers. The intrinsic muscles are illustrated in situ in Figures 
8.35D & E and 8.38; their attachments, innervation, and 
main actions are summarized in Table 8.5.
• Adductors and abductors: These muscles move the vocal 
folds to open and close the rima glottidis. The principal 
adductors are the lateral crico-arytenoid muscles, 
Conus elasticus
Lamina of
thyroid cartilage
Vocal ligament
Rima glottidis
Arytenoid
cartilage
(A) Normal respiration
      (“resting” position)
Lamina of cricoid cartilage
(B) Forced respiration
(C) Phonation
(D) Whispering
FIGURE 8.36. Variations in shape of rima glottidis. A. The shape of the rima glottidis, the aperture between the vocal folds, varies according to the posi-
tion of the vocal folds. During normal respiration, the laryngeal muscles are relaxed and the rima glottidis assumes a narrow, slit-like position. B. During a 
deep inhalation, the vocal ligaments are abducted by contraction of the posterior crico-arytenoid muscles, opening the rima glottidis widely into an inverted 
kite shape. C. During phonation, the arytenoid muscles adduct the arytenoid cartilages at the same time that the lateral crico-arytenoid muscles moderately 
adduct. Air forced between the adducted vocal ligaments produces tone. Stronger contraction of the same muscles seals the rima glottidis (Valsalva maneuver). 
D. During whispering, the vocal ligaments are strongly adducted by the lateral crico-arytenoid muscles, but the relaxed arytenoid muscles allow air to pass 
between the arytenoid cartilages (intercartilaginous part of rima glottidis), which is modiﬁ
 ed into toneless speech. No tone is produced.
Epiglottis
Right lateral view
Cricothyroid
Recurrent laryngeal
nerve (branch of
vagus nerve)
Facet for 
thyroid
cartilage
Inferior
laryngeal
nerve
Lateral
Crico-
arytenoid
Arytenoid
Ary-epiglottic
Thyro-epiglottic
Median
glosso-epiglottic
fold
Internal laryngeal nerve 
(branch of superior
laryngeal nerve)
Thyro-arytenoid
Tracheal cartilages
Facet
for cricoid
cartilage
Posterior
Posterior
branch
Anterior
branch
Thyro-epiglottic
FIGURE 8.37. Muscles and nerves of larynx and cricothyroid joint. 
The thyroid cartilage is sawn through to the right of the median plane. 
The cricothyroid joint is disarticulated, and the right lamina of the thy-
roid cartilage is turned anteriorly (like opening a book), stripping the crico-
thyroid muscles off the arch of the cricoid cartilage.
