# Page 357

INTRODUCTION TO PELVIS 
AND PERINEUM
In common usage, the pelvis (L. basin) is the part of the trunk 
that is inferoposterior to the abdomen, and is the area of 
transition between the trunk and the lower limbs. The pelvic 
cavity is the inferiormost part of the abdominopelvic cavity. 
Anatomically, the pelvis is the part of the body surrounded 
by the pelvic girdle (bony pelvis), part of the appendicular 
skeleton of the lower limb (Fig. 3.1).
The pelvis is subdivided into greater and lesser pelves. 
The greater pelvis is surrounded by the superior pelvic 
girdle. The greater pelvis is occupied by inferior abdomi-
nal viscera, affording them protection similar to the way 
the superior abdominal viscera are protected by the inferior 
thoracic cage. The lesser pelvis is surrounded by the infe-
rior pelvic girdle, which provides the skeletal framework for 
both the pelvic cavity and the perineum—compartments of 
the trunk separated by the musculofascial pelvic diaphragm. 
Externally, the pelvis is covered or overlapped by the inferior 
anterolateral abdominal wall anteriorly, the gluteal region of 
the lower limb posterolaterally, and the perineum inferiorly.
The term perineum1 refers both to the area of the surface of 
the trunk between the thighs and the buttocks, extending from 
the coccyx to the pubis, and to the shallow  
compartment lying 
deep (superior) to this area but inferior to the  
pelvic diaphragm. 
The perineum includes the anus and external genitalia: the 
penis and scrotum of the male and the vulva of the female.
PELVIC GIRDLE
The pelvic girdle is a basin-shaped ring of bones that con-
nects the vertebral column to the two femurs. The primary 
functions of the pelvic girdle are to:
• Bear the weight of the upper body when sitting and standing.
• Transfer that weight from the axial to the lower appen-
dicular skeleton for standing and walking.
• Provide attachment for the powerful muscles of locomo-
tion and posture and those of the abdominal wall, with-
standing the forces generated by their actions.
Consequently, the pelvic girdle is strong and rigid, especially 
compared to the pectoral (shoulder) girdle. Other functions 
of the pelvic girdle are to:
• Contain and protect the pelvic viscera (inferior parts of 
the urinary tracts and the internal reproductive organs) 
and the inferior abdominal viscera (intestines), while 
 
permitting passage of their terminal parts (and, in females, 
a full-term fetus) via the perineum.
• Provide support for the abdominopelvic viscera and gravid 
(pregnant) uterus.
• Provide attachment for the erectile bodies of the external 
genitalia.
• Provide attachment for the muscles and membranes that 
assist the functions listed above by forming the pelvic ﬂ
 oor 
and ﬁ
 lling gaps that exist in or around it.
1The term perineum has been used in different ways, in different languages, and 
in different circumstances. In its most restricted sense, and in obstetrics, it has 
been used to refer to the area superﬁ
 cial to the perineal body, between the vulva 
or scrotum and the anus or to the perineal body itself. In an intermediate sense, 
it has included only the perineal region, a superﬁ
 cial (surface) area bounded by 
the thighs laterally, the mons pubis anteriorly, and the coccyx posteriorly. In its 
widest sense, as used in Terminologia Anatomica (the international anatomical 
terminology) and in this book, it refers to the region of the body that includes all 
structures of the anal and urogenital triangles, superﬁ
 cial and deep, extending 
as far superiorly as the inferior fascia of the pelvic diaphragm.
PERINEUM / 402
Fasciae and Pouches of Urogenital Triangle / 404
Features of Anal Triangle / 410
TABLE 3.8. Arteries of Perineum / 412
BLUE BOX: Perineum. Disruption of Perineal Body; Episi-
otomy; Rupture of Urethra in Males and Extravasation of 
Urine; Starvation and Rectal Prolapse; Pectinate Line—
A Clinically Important Landmark; Anal Fissures and Peri-
anal Abscesses; Hemorrhoids; Anorectal 
Incontinence / 414
Male Urogenital Triangle / 418
TABLE 3.9. Muscles of Perineum / 424
BLUE BOX: Male Urogenital Triangle. Urethral Cath-
eterization; Distension of Scrotum; Palpation of Testes; 
Hypospadias; Phimosis, Paraphimosis, and Circumcision; 
Impotence and Erectile Dysfunction / 425
Female Urogenital Triangle / 428
TABLE 3.10. Nerves of Perineum / 432
BLUE BOX: Female Urogenital Triangle. Female Circumcision; 
Vulvar Trauma; Infection of Greater Vestibular Glands; Puden-
dal and Ilio-inguinal Nerve Blocks; Exercises for Increased Devel-
opment of Female Perineal Muscles; Vaginismus / 432
SECTIONAL MEDICAL IMAGING OF PELVIS 
AND PERINEUM / 434
Magnetic Resonance Imaging / 434
Chapter 3  •  Pelvis and Perineum
327
