# Page 1105

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1075
SPINAL ACCESSORY NERVE (CN XI)
Functions: Somatic motor to the striated sternocleidomas-
toid and trapezius muscles.
Nuclei: The spinal accessory nerve arises from the 
nucleus of the spinal accessory nerve, a column of ante-
rior horn motor neurons in the superior ﬁ
 ve or six cervical 
segments of the spinal cord (Fig. 9.5).
The traditional “cranial root” of CN XI is actually a part of 
CN X (Lachman et al., 2002). It may be united for a short dis-
tance with the spinal accessory nerve (CN XI) (Fig. 9.17). 
CN XI emerges as a series of rootlets from the ﬁ
 rst ﬁ
 ve or 
six cervical segments of the spinal cord. It joins the CN X 
temporarily as they pass through the jugular foramen, sepa-
rating again as they exit (Fig. 9.14). CN XI descends along 
the internal carotid artery, penetrates and innervates the 
sternocleidomastoid, and emerges from the muscle near the 
middle of its posterior border. Next, CN XI crosses the poste-
rior cervical region and passes deep to the superior border of 
the trapezius to descend on its deep surface, providing mul-
tiple branches to the muscle. Branches of the cervical plexus 
conveying sensory ﬁ
 bers from spinal nerves C2–C4 join the 
spinal accessory nerve in the posterior cervical region, pro-
viding these muscles with pain and proprioceptive ﬁ
 bers.
Postsynaptic fibers pass to
parotid gland via branches of
auriculotemporal nerve (CN V3).
Parasympathetic fibers synapse 
in the otic ganglion.
Lesser petrosal nerve leaves cra- 
nium through the foramen ovale.
Lesser petrosal nerve penetrates
roof of tympanic cavity (tegmen
tympani) to enter middle cranial
fossa.
Tympanic nerve arises from 
CN IX and emerges with it from 
the jugular foramen.
Tympanic nerve enters the 
middle ear via the tympanic 
canaliculus in the petrous part of 
the temporal bone.
Tympanic nerve forms the
tympanic plexus on the 
promontory of the middle ear.
The lesser petrosal nerve arises 
as a branch of the tympanic 
plexus.
Parasympathetic (visceral motor)
FIGURE 9.15. Parasympathetic innervation involving the glossopha-
ryngeal nerve (CN IX). CN IX sends presynaptic parasympathetic (secre-
tomotor) ﬁ
 bers to the otic ganglion via a convoluted route; postsynaptic 
ﬁ
 bers pass from the ganglion to the parotid gland via the auriculotempo-
ral nerve (Fig. 9.13B).
SPINAL ACCESSORY NERVE
¨ The spinal accessory nerves (CN XI) supply somatic motor 
ﬁ
 bers to the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. 
¨ The nerves arise as rootlets from the sides of the spinal 
cord in the superior ﬁ
 ve or six cervical segments. ¨ They 
ascend into the cranial cavity via the foramen magnum 
and exit through the jugular foramina, crossing the lat-
eral cervical region, where pain and proprioceptive ﬁ
 bers 
from the cervical plexus join the nerves.
The Bottom Line
HYPOGLOSSAL NERVE (CN XII)
Functions: Somatic motor to the intrinsic and extrinsic mus-
cles of the tongue (G. glossa)—styloglossus, hyoglossus, and 
genioglossus.
The hypoglossal nerve (CN XII) arises as a purely motor 
nerve by several rootlets from the medulla and leaves the 
cranium through the hypoglossal canal (Figs. 9.2 and 9.3). 
After exiting the cranial cavity, CN XII is joined by a branch 
or branches of the cervical plexus conveying general somatic 
motor ﬁ
 bers from C1 and C2 spinal nerves and somatic (gen-
eral) sensory ﬁ
 bers from the spinal ganglion of C2 (Fig. 9.18). 
These spinal nerve ﬁ
 bers “hitch a ride” with CN XII to reach 
(text continues on p. 1078)
