# Page 1066

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1036
internal to a circular layer of muscles. Most of the alimentary 
tract is composed of smooth muscle, with a layer of longitudinal 
muscle external to a circular layer. The external circular layer of 
pharyngeal muscles consists of three pharyngeal constrictors: 
superior, middle, and inferior (Figs. 8.44 and 8.46A & B). 
The internal longitudinal muscles consists of the palatopha-
ryngeus, stylopharyngeus, and salpingopharyngeus. These 
muscles elevate the larynx and shorten the pharynx during swal-
lowing and speaking. The pharyngeal muscles are illustrated in 
Figure 8.47, and their attachments, nerve supply, and actions of 
the pharyngeal muscles are described in Table 8.6.
The pharyngeal constrictors have a strong internal  
fascial 
lining, the pharyngobasilar fascia (Fig. 8.46B), and a thin 
external fascial lining, the buccopharyngeal fascia (Fig. 8.41A). 
Inferiorly, the buccopharyngeal fascia blends with the pre-
tracheal layer of the deep cervical fascia. The pharyngeal 
constrictors contract involuntarily so that contraction takes 
place sequentially from the superior to the inferior end of 
the pharynx, propelling food into the esophagus. All three 
 
pharyngeal constrictors are supplied by the pharyngeal 
border of the cricoid cartilage, where it narrows and becomes 
continuous with the esophagus. Posteriorly, the laryngophar-
ynx is related to the bodies of the C4–C6 vertebrae. Its pos-
terior and lateral walls are formed by the middle and inferior 
pharyngeal constrictor muscles (Fig. 8.46A). Internally, the 
wall is formed by the palatopharyngeus and stylopharyngeus 
muscles. The laryngopharynx communicates with the larynx 
through the laryngeal inlet on its anterior wall (Fig. 8.42).
The piriform fossa (recess) is a small depression of the 
laryngopharyngeal cavity on either side of the laryngeal inlet. 
This mucosa-lined fossa is separated from the laryngeal inlet 
by the ary-epiglottic fold. Laterally, the piriform fossa is 
bounded by the medial surfaces of the thyroid cartilage and 
the thyrohyoid membrane (Fig. 8.39). Branches of the inter-
nal laryngeal and recurrent laryngeal nerves lie deep to the 
mucous membrane of the piriform fossa and are vulnerable 
to injury when a foreign body lodges in the fossa.
Pharyngeal Muscles. The wall of the pharynx is excep-
tional for the alimentary tract, having a muscular layer composed 
entirely of voluntary muscle, arranged with  
longitudinal muscles 
Branches
of CN X
Jugular bulb
Styloid process
Facial nerve
Parotid gland
Digastric (cut)
Stylopharyngeus
Pharyngeal 
Paratracheal lymph nodes
Right recurrent laryngeal nerve
Inferior thyroid artery
Parathyroid gland
Sheath of thyroid gland
Sympathetic trunk
Common carotid artery
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Internal jugular vein
Sternocleidomastoid
Spinal accessory nerve (CN XI)
Hypoglossal nerve (CN XII)
Superior laryngeal
XII   X   IX   XI
Cranial nerves
(B) Posterior view
Esophagus
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
Superior
Inferior 
Parathyroid 
glands
Pharyngo-esophageal
junction
Thyroid gland
External
Internal 
Common
Carotid
arteries
Submandibular gland
Ascending pharyngeal
artery
Glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX)
Digastric
Stylohyoid
Pharyngobasilar fascia
Stylopharyngeus
FIGURE 8.46. (Continued) Pharynx and cranial nerves. B. The narrowest and least distensible part of the alimentary tract is the pharyngo-esophageal 
junction, where the laryngopharynx becomes the esophagus.
