# Page 1069

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1039
The laryngeal prominence is produced by the meeting 
of the laminae of the thyroid cartilage at an acute angle in 
the anterior midline. This thyroid angle, most acute in post-
pubertal males, forms the laryngeal prominence (“Adam’s 
apple”), which is palpable and frequently visible. During 
palpation of the prominence, it can be felt to recede on swal-
lowing. The vocal folds are at the level of the middle of the 
laryngeal prominence.
The cricoid cartilage can be felt inferior to the laryngeal 
prominence at the level of the C6 vertebra. Extend your 
neck as far as possible and run your ﬁ
 nger over the laryngeal 
prominence. As your ﬁ
 nger passes inferiorly from the prom-
inence, feel the cricothyroid ligament, the site for a needle 
cricothyrotomy or coniotomy (see the blue box “Aspiration 
of Foreign Bodies and Heimlich Maneuver” on p. 1044). 
After your ﬁ
 nger passes over the arch of the cricoid carti-
lage, note that your ﬁ
 ngertip sinks in because the arch of 
the cartilage projects farther anteriorly than the rings of the 
Surface Anatomy of Endocrine and 
Respiratory Layers of Cervical Viscera
The neck of an infant is short; therefore, the cervical viscera 
are located more superiorly in infants than in adults. The cer-
vical viscera do not reach their ﬁ
 nal levels until after the 7th 
year. The elongation of the neck is accompanied by growth 
changes in the skin. Consequently, a midline incision in the 
inferior neck of an infant results in a scar that will lie over the 
superior part of the sternum as a child.
The U-shaped hyoid bone lies in the anterior part of 
the neck in the deep angle between the mandible and 
the thyroid cartilage at the level of the C3 vertebra (Fig. 
8.50). Swallow, and the hyoid will move under your 
fingers when they are placed at the angle between the 
chin and anterior neck. The greater horn of one side of 
the hyoid is palpable only when the greater horn on the 
opposite side is steadied.
(A)
(C)
(B)
A
P
Left internal 
jugular vein
Internal jugular vein
External jugular vein
Thoracic duct
Left  brachiocephalic
vein
Right 
lymphatic
duct
Jugular 
lymphatic
trunk
Right internal 
jugular vein
Thyroid 
gland
Right venous
angle
Left venous 
angle
A
P
Occipital
Mastoid
Deep and superficial lymph drainage (A) & (B)
Parotid
Buccal
Submental
Superfical cervical
Deep cervical
Retropharyngeal
Jugulo-omohyoid
Submandibular
Jugulo-digastric
Pharyngeal tonsil
Palatine tonsil
Infrahyoid
Superior deep cervical
Inferior deep cervical
Lymph drainage (C)
Prelaryngeal
Paratracheal
Pretracheal
FIGURE 8.48. Lymphatic drainage of head and neck. A and B. The pathways of the superﬁ
 cial and deep lymphatic drainages are shown, respectively. 
C. The lymph nodes, lymphatic trunks, and thoracic duct are shown.
