# Page 1003

Chapter 7  •  Head
973
from a pinpoint foramen in the apex of the eminence and 
inserts on the neck of the stapes. The stapedius pulls the sta-
pes posteriorly and tilts its base in the oval window, thereby 
tightening the anular ligament and reducing the oscillatory 
range. It also prevents excessive movement of the stapes. The 
nerve to the stapedius arises from the facial nerve (CN VII).
Internal Ear
The internal ear contains the vestibulocochlear organ 
concerned with the reception of sound and the maintenance 
of balance. Buried in the petrous part of the temporal bone 
(Figs. 7.113 and 7.117A), the internal ear consists of the sacs 
and ducts of the membranous labyrinth. The membranous 
labyrinth, containing endolymph, is suspended within the 
perilymph-ﬁ
 lled bony labyrinth, either by delicate ﬁ
 laments 
similar to the ﬁ
 laments of arachnoid mater that traverse the 
subarachnoid space or by the substantial spiral ligament. It 
does not ﬂ
 oat. These ﬂ
 uids are involved in stimulating the 
end organs for balance and hearing, respectively.
BONY LABYRINTH
The bony labyrinth is a series of cavities (cochlea, vestibule, 
and semicircular canals) contained within the otic capsule 
of the petrous part of the temporal bone (Figs. 7.113A and 
7.117B). The otic capsule is made of bone that is denser 
than the remainder of the petrous temporal bone and can 
Base of stapes occupying
oval window
Stapes
Tympanic cavity
Pharyngotympanic tube
Tympanic 
membrane
External 
acoustic 
meatus
Malleus
Incus
(A) Anterior view of coronal section through middle ear
Epitympanic recess
Head
Neck
Lateral 
process
Handle
Posteromedial views
Superolateral view
Medial views
Handle
Neck
Anterior 
process
Head
“Cog”
Base 
Anterior 
limb
Head
Posterior 
limb
Long limb
Lenticular 
process
Body
Short limb
(B) MALLEUS
(C) INCUS
(D) STAPES
Body
Short 
limb
Long limb
Lenticular 
process
Head
Posterior 
limb
Neck
Base 
(footplate) 
Anterior 
limb
Superior view
Medial view
FIGURE 7.116. Auditory ossicles. A. The ossicles in situ are shown. B–E. The isolated ossicles are shown.
