# Page 1050

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1020
reach the gland through the cardiac and superior and inferior 
thyroid peri-arterial plexuses that accompany the thyroid arter-
ies. These ﬁ
 bers are vasomotor, not secretomotor. They cause 
constriction of blood vessels. Endocrine secretion from the 
thyroid gland is hormonally regulated by the pituitary gland.
PARATHYROID GLANDS
The small ﬂ
 attened, oval parathyroid glands usually lie 
external to the thyroid capsule on the medial half of the poste-
rior surface of each lobe of the thyroid gland, inside its sheath 
(Figs. 8.26B, 8.27 and 8.30A). The superior parathyroid 
glands usually lie slightly more than 1 cm superior to the 
point of entry of the inferior thyroid arteries into the thyroid 
gland. The inferior parathyroid glands usually lie slightly 
more than 1 cm inferior to the arterial entry point (Skandalakis 
et al., 1995). Most people have four parathyroid glands. 
Approximately 5% of people have more; some have only two 
glands. The superior parathyroid glands, more constant in 
position than the inferior ones, are usually at the level of the 
inferior border of the cricoid cartilage. The inferior parathy-
roid glands are usually near the inferior poles of the thyroid 
gland, but they may lie in various positions (Fig. 8.30B). In 
1–5% of people, an inferior parathyroid gland is deep in the 
superior mediastinum (Norton and Wells, 1994).
Vessels of Parathyroid Glands. Because the inferior thy-
roid arteries provide the primary blood supply to the posterior 
Veins of  Thyroid Gland. Three pairs of thyroid veins 
usually form a thyroid plexus of veins on the anterior sur-
face of the thyroid gland and anterior to the trachea (Figs. 
8.27 and 8.28). The superior thyroid veins accompany the 
superior thyroid arteries; they drain the superior poles of 
the thyroid gland; the middle thyroid veins do not accom-
pany but run essentially parallel courses with the inferior thy-
roid arteries; they drain the middle of the lobes. The usually 
independent inferior thyroid veins drain the inferior poles. 
The superior and middle thyroid veins drain into the IJVs; 
the inferior thyroid veins drain into the brachiocephalic veins 
posterior to the manubrium.
Lymphatic Drainage of Thyroid Gland. The lymphatic 
vessels of this gland run in the interlobular connective tissue, 
usually near the arteries; they communicate with a capsular 
network of lymphatic vessels. From here, the vessels pass 
initially to prelaryngeal, pretracheal, and paratracheal 
lymph nodes. The prelaryngeal nodes drain in turn to the 
superior deep cervical lymph nodes, and the pretracheal and 
paratracheal lymph nodes drain to the inferior deep cervical 
nodes (Fig. 8.29). Laterally, lymphatic vessels located along 
the superior thyroid veins pass directly to the inferior deep cer-
vical lymph nodes. Some lymphatic vessels may drain into the 
brachiocephalic lymph nodes or the thoracic duct (Fig. 8.27).
Nerves of Thyroid Gland. The nerves of the thyroid 
gland are derived from the superior, middle, and inferior 
 
cervical (sympathetic) ganglia (Figs. 8.25 and 8.27). They 
External carotid artery
Anterior view
Inferior pharyngeal
constrictor
Anterior sternoclavicular 
ligament
Sternothyroid
Inferior thyroid vein
Trachea
Cricoid cartilage
Cricothyroid
Thyroid cartilage
Articular disc of sternoclavicular joint
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
Esophagus
Cardiac and esophageal branches
(cardiopulmonary splanchnic nerves)
Thoracic duct
Middle cervical (sympathetic) ganglion
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve (going deep
to become the inferior laryngeal nerve)
Inferior thyroid artery
Ascending cervical branch
Contents of carotid sheath (common carotid 
artery, IJV, vagus nerve [CN X]) 
Sympathetic trunk
Superior thyroid 
artery and vein
Superior laryngeal 
nerve, external branch
Prevertebral fascia
Superior pole of left lobe
Inferior pole
of left lobe
Thyroid gland
Parathyroid glands
FIGURE 8.27. Dissection of left side of root of neck. The viscera (thyroid gland, trachea, and esophagus) are retracted to the right, and the contents of 
the left carotid sheath are retracted to the left. The middle thyroid vein, severed to allow such retraction, is not apparent. The left parathyroid glands on the 
posterior aspect of the left lobe of the thyroid gland are exposed. The recurrent laryngeal nerve ascends beside the trachea, in the angle between the trachea 
and the esophagus. The thoracic duct passes laterally, posterior to the contents of the carotid sheath as the thyrocervical trunk passes medially.
