# Page 1075

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1045
(needle cricothyrotomy, or “coniotomy”) to permit fast entry 
of air. Later, a surgical cricothyrotomy may be performed, 
which involves an incision through the skin and cricothyroid 
ligament and insertion of a small tracheostomy tube into the 
trachea (Fig. B8.13).
Tracheostomy
A transverse incision through the skin of the neck 
and anterior wall of the trachea, tracheostomy 
establishes an airway in patients with upper airway 
obstruction or respiratory failure (Fig. B8.13). The infra-
hyoid muscles are retracted laterally, and the isthmus of the 
thyroid gland is either divided or retracted superiorly. An 
opening is made in the trachea between the ﬁ
 rst and second 
tracheal rings or through the second through fourth rings. A 
tracheostomy tube is then inserted into the trachea and 
secured. To avoid complications during a tracheostomy, the 
following anatomical relationships are important:
• The inferior thyroid veins arise from a venous plexus on 
the thyroid gland and descend anterior to the trachea.
• A small thyroid ima artery is present in approximately 
10% of people; it ascends from the brachiocephalic trunk 
or the arch of the aorta to the isthmus of the thyroid gland.
• The left brachiocephalic vein, jugular venous arch, and 
pleurae may be encountered, particularly in infants 
and children.
• The thymus covers the inferior part of the trachea in 
infants and children.
• The trachea is small, mobile, and soft in infants, making 
it easy to cut through its posterior wall and damage the 
esophagus.
Injury to Laryngeal Nerves
Because the inferior laryngeal nerve, the continua-
tion of the recurrent laryngeal nerve, innervates the 
muscles moving the vocal fold, paralysis of the vocal 
fold results when injury to laryngeal nerves occurs. The voice 
is poor initially because the paralyzed vocal fold cannot 
adduct to meet the normal vocal fold. Within weeks, the con-
tralateral fold crosses the midline when its muscles act to 
compensate. When bilateral paralysis of the vocal folds 
occurs, the voice is almost absent because the vocal folds are 
motionless in a position that is slightly narrower than the usu-
ally neutral respiratory position. They cannot be adducted for 
phonation, nor can they be abducted for increased respira-
tion, resulting in stridor (high pitched, noisy respiration) 
often accompanied by anxiety similar to that accompanying 
an asthmatic episode.
In progressive lesions of the recurrent laryngeal nerve, 
abduction of the vocal ligaments is lost before adduction; 
conversely, during recovery, adduction returns before 
abduction. Hoarseness is the common symptom of serious 
disorders of the larynx, such as carcinoma of the vocal folds.
folds. The rima glottidis closes and no air enters the trachea. 
The resulting blockage may completely seal off the larynx 
(laryngeal obstruction) and choke the person, leaving the 
individual speechless because the larynx is blocked. 
Asphyxiation occurs, and the person will die in approximately 
5 min from lack of oxygen if the obstruction is not removed.
A person who is choking will cough in an attempt to dis-
lodge the object. The vestibular folds are part of the protec-
tive mechanism that closes the larynx. The mucosa of the 
vestibule is sensitive to foreign objects such as food. When 
an object passes through the laryngeal inlet and contacts the 
vestibular epithelium, violent coughing occurs. Emergency 
therapy must be given to open the airway. The procedure 
used depends on the condition of the person, the facilities 
available, and the experience of the person giving ﬁ
 rst aid.
Because the lungs still contain air, sudden compression 
of the abdomen (Heimlich maneuver) causes the diaphragm 
to elevate and compress the lungs, expelling air from the 
trachea into the larynx. This maneuver usually dislodges 
the food or other material from the larynx. To perform 
the Heimlich maneuver, the person giving ﬁ
 rst aid uses 
subdiaphragmatic abdominal thrusts to expel the foreign 
object from the larynx. First, the closed ﬁ
 st, with the base 
of the palm facing inward, is placed on the victim’s abdo-
men between the umbilicus and the xiphoid process of 
the sternum (Fig. B8.12). The ﬁ
 st is grasped by the other 
hand and forcefully thrust inward and superiorly, forcing 
the diaphragm superiorly. This action forces air from the 
lungs and creates an artiﬁ
 cial cough that usually expels the 
foreign object. Several abdominal thrusts may be necessary 
to remove the obstruction in the larynx.
In extreme cases, experienced persons (e.g., physicians) 
insert a large-bore needle through the cricothyroid ligament 
Position of hands
Subdiaphragmatic position
for placement of hands
FIGURE B8.12. Heimlich maneuver.
