# Page 1052

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1022
inferior part of the pharynx (oropharynx) with the trachea. 
Although most commonly known for its role as the phonating 
mechanism for voice production, its most vital function is to 
guard the air passages, especially during swallowing when it 
serves as the “sphincter” or “valve” of the lower respiratory 
tract, thus maintaining a patent airway.
LARYNX
The larynx is the complex organ of voice production (the 
“voice box”) composed of nine cartilages connected by mem-
branes and ligaments and containing the vocal folds (“cords”). 
The larynx is located in the anterior neck at the level of 
the bodies of C3–C6 vertebrae (Fig. 8.31). It connects the 
(B) Anterior view
11%
0.3%
13%
1.6%
38%
1%
0.3%
3%
1%
20%
6%
4%
Internal laryngeal
nerve
External laryngeal
nerve
Sheath of thyroid
gland
Right lobe of thyroid
gland
Parathyroid glands
Inferior thyroid artery
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Epiglottis
Submucous coat
of esophagus
Esophagus
Cricopharyngeus
Greater horn of
hyoid bone
Superior
Inferior
Para-
thyroid
glands
(A) Posterior view
Inferior constrictor
FIGURE 8.30. Thyroid and parathyroid glands. A. The thyroid sheath has been dissected from the posterior surface of the thyroid gland to reveal the 
three embedded parathyroid glands. Both parathyroid glands on the right side are rather low, and the inferior gland is inferior to the thyroid gland. B. Sites 
and frequencies of aberrant parathyroid glandular tissue are shown.
Cerebellum
Spinous process
Intervertebral disc
Body of C6 vertebra
Spinal cord
Dens of axis
Posterior arch of atlas
Anterior arch of atlas
Medulla oblongata
Pons
4th ventricle
Middle nasal concha
Trachea
Esophagus
Larynx
Epiglottis
Mandible
Oropharynx
Tongue
Mucosal surface 
of tongue
Soft
Hard
Palate
Inferior nasal concha
Pharyngeal tonsil 
(adenoids)
Median section
FIGURE 8.31. Median MRI of head and neck. Because the air and food passages share the oropharynx, separation of food and air must occur to 
continue into the trachea (anterior) and esophagus (posterior). (Courtesy of Dr. W. Kucharczyk, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.)
