# Page 1094

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1064
TROCHLEAR NERVE (CN IV)
Functions: Somatic motor (general somatic efferent) to one 
extra-ocular muscle (superior oblique).
Nucleus: The nucleus of the trochlear nerve is located 
in the midbrain, immediately caudal to the oculomotor 
nucleus (Fig. 9.5).
The oculomotor nerve (CN III) provides the following 
(Fig. 9.8):
• Motor to the striated muscle of four of the six extra-ocular 
muscles (superior, medial, and inferior recti and inferior 
oblique) and superior eyelid (L. levator palpebrae superi-
oris); hence the nerve’s name.
• Parasympathetic through the ciliary ganglion to the smooth 
muscle of the sphincter pupillae, which causes con 
striction of 
the pupil and ciliary muscle, which produces accommodation 
(allowing the lens to become more rounded) for near vision.
CN III is the chief motor nerve to the ocular and extra-ocular 
muscles. It emerges from the midbrain, pierces the dura mater 
lateral to the sellar diaphragm rooﬁ
 ng over the hypo 
physis, and 
then runs through the roof and lateral wall of the cavernous sinus.
CN III leaves the cranial cavity and enters the orbit through the 
superior orbital ﬁ
 ssure. Within this ﬁ
 ssure, CN III divides into a 
superior division (which supplies the superior rectus and leva-
tor palpebrae superioris) and an inferior division (which sup-
plies the inferior and medial rectus and inferior oblique). The 
inferior division also carries presynaptic parasympathetic (vis-
ceral efferent) ﬁ
 bers to the ciliary ganglion, where they synapse 
(Fig. 9.4; Table 9.3). Postsynaptic ﬁ
 bers from this ganglion pass 
to the eyeball in the short ciliary nerves to innervate the ciliary 
body and sphincter pupillae (see Chapter 7, p. 896).
Abducent
nerve (CN VI)
Trochlear
nerve (CN IV)
Oculomotor
nerve (CN III)
Inferior (ventral) view
Oculomotor nerve (CN III)
Trochlear nerve (CN IV)
Abducent nerve (CN VI)
Inferior oblique
Inferior rectus
Short ciliary nerves
Ciliary ganglion
Lateral rectus
Inferior orbital fissure
Trochlear nerve (CN IV)
Abducent nerve (CN VI)
Oculomotor nerve (CN III)
Inferior division CN III
Superior division CN III
Optic nerve (CN II) 
Medial rectus
Superior rectus
Superior oblique
Trochlea
Levator palpebrae superioris
Superior orbital fissure
Nerves of the orbit: 
FIGURE 9.8. Distribution of oculomotor (CN III), trochlear (CN IV), and abducent (CN VI) nerves. CN IV supplies the superior oblique, CN VI supplies 
the lateral rectus, and CN III supplies ﬁ
 ve striated extra-ocular muscles (levator palpebrae superioris, superior rectus, medial rectus, inferior rectus, and infe-
rior oblique) and two intra-ocular muscles (ciliary muscle and sphincter pupillae muscle—not shown; see Chapter 7, p. 896).
OCULOMOTOR NERVE
¨ The oculomotor nerves (CN III) send somatic motor 
ﬁ
 bers to all extra-ocular muscles, except the superior 
oblique and lateral rectus. ¨ These nerves also send pre-
synaptic parasympathetic ﬁ
 bers to the ciliary ganglion 
for innervation of the ciliary body and sphincter pupillae. 
¨ These nerves originate from the brainstem, emerging 
medial to the cerebral peduncles, and run in the lateral 
wall of the cavernous sinus. ¨ These nerves enter the 
orbit through the superior orbital ﬁ
 ssures and divide into 
superior and inferior branches.
The Bottom Line
