# Page 1112

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1082
VESTIBULOCOCHLEAR NERVE
Injuries to Vestibulocochlear Nerve
Although the vestibular and cochlear nerves are 
essentially independent, peripheral lesions often 
produce concurrent clinical effects because of their 
close relationship. Hence lesions of CN VIII may cause tinni-
tus (ringing or buzzing in ears), vertigo (dizziness, loss of bal-
ance), and impairment or loss of hearing. Central lesions may 
involve either the cochlear or vestibular divisions of CN VIII.
Deafness 
There are two kinds of deafness (hearing loss): con-
ductive deafness, involving the external or middle ear 
(e.g., otitis media, inﬂ
 ammation in the middle ear), 
and sensorineural deafness, which results from disease in the 
cochlea or in the pathway from the cochlea to the brain.
Acoustic Neuroma
An acoustic neuroma (neuroﬁ
 broma) is a slow-grow-
ing benign tumor of the neurolemma (Schwann) 
cells. The tumor begins in the vestibular nerve while 
it is in the internal acoustic meatus. The early symptom of an 
acoustic neuroma is usually loss of hearing. Dysequilibrium 
(derangement of the sense of equilibrium) and tinnitus occur 
in approximately 70% of patients (Bruce et al., 2010).
Trauma and Vertigo
People with head trauma often experience head-
ache, dizziness, vertigo, and other features of post-
traumatic injury. Vertigo is a hallucination of 
movement involving the person or the environment (Wazen, 
2010). It often involves a spinning sensation but may be felt 
as a swaying back and forth or falling. These symptoms, often 
accompanied by nausea and vomiting, are usually related to 
a peripheral vestibular nerve lesion.
GLOSSOPHARYNGEAL NERVE
Lesions of Glossopharyngeal Nerve
Isolated lesions of CN IX or its nuclei are uncom-
mon and are not associated with perceptible disabil-
ity (Brannagan et al., 2010). Taste is absent on the 
posterior third of the tongue, and the gag reﬂ
 ex is absent on 
the side of the lesion. Ipsilateral weakness may produce a 
noticeable change in swallowing.
Injuries of CN IX resulting from infection or tumors are 
usually accompanied by signs of involvement of adjacent 
nerves. Because CN IX, CN X, and CN XI pass through the 
jugular foramen, tumors in this region produce multiple cra-
nial nerve palsies, called the jugular foramen syndrome. Pain 
in the distribution of CN IX may be associated with involve-
ment of the nerve in a tumor in the neck.
Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia (glossopharyngeal tic) 
is uncommon and its cause is unknown. The sudden 
intensiﬁ
 cation of pain is of a burning or stabbing 
nature. These paroxysms of pain are often initiated by swal-
lowing, protruding the tongue, talking, or touching the pala-
tine tonsil (Brannagan et al., 2010). Pain paroxysms occur 
during eating when trigger areas are stimulated.
VAGUS NERVE
Isolated lesions of CN X are uncommon. Injury to pha-
ryngeal branches of CN X results in dysphagia (difﬁ
 -
culty in swallowing). Lesions of the superior laryngeal 
nerve produce anesthesia of the superior part of the larynx and 
paralysis of the cricothyroid muscle (see Chapter 8). The voice 
is weak and tires easily. Injury of a recurrent laryngeal nerve 
may be caused by aneurysms of the arch of the aorta and may 
occur during neck operations. Injury of the recurrent laryngeal 
nerve causes hoarseness and dysphonia (difﬁ
 culty in speaking) 
because of paralysis of the vocal folds (cords). Paralysis of both 
recurrent laryngeal nerves causes aphonia (loss of voice) and 
inspiratory stridor (a harsh, high pitched respiratory sound). 
Paralysis of recurrent laryngeal nerves usually results from can-
cer of the larynx and thyroid gland and/or from injury during 
surgery on the thyroid gland, neck, esophagus, heart, and lungs. 
Because of its longer course, lesions of the left recurrent laryn-
geal nerve are more common than those of the right. Proximal 
lesions of CN X also affect the pharyngeal and superior laryn-
geal nerves, causing difﬁ
 culty in swallowing and speaking.
SPINAL ACCESSORY NERVE
Because of its nearly subcutaneous passage through 
the posterior cervical region, iatrogenic (physician-
caused) injury of CN XI may occur during surgical 
procedures such as lymph node biopsy, cannulation of the inter-
nal jugular vein, and carotid endarterectomy (see Chapter 8).
HYPOGLOSSAL NERVE
Injury to CN XII paralyzes the ipsilateral half of the 
tongue. After some time, the tongue atrophies, 
making it appear shrunken and wrinkled. When the 
tongue is protruded, its apex deviates toward the paralyzed 
side because of the unopposed action of the genioglossus 
muscle on the normal side of the tongue (see Chapter 7).
Board-review questions, case studies, and additional resources are available at thePoint.lww.com.
