# Page 1010

Chapter 7  •  Head
980
sounds, and sensitivity to noises (Storper, 2010). A characteristic 
sign is ballooning of the cochlear duct, utricle, and saccule 
caused by an increase in endolymphatic volume.
High Tone Deafness
Persistent exposure to excessively loud sounds 
causes degenerative changes in the spiral organ, 
resulting in high tone deafness. This type of hearing 
loss commonly occurs in workers who are exposed to loud 
noises and do not wear protective earmuffs (e.g., individuals 
working for long periods around jet engines).
Otic Barotrauma
Injury caused to the ear by an imbalance in pressure 
between ambient (surrounding) air and the air in the 
middle ear is called otic barotrauma. This type of 
injury usually occurs in ﬂ
 iers and divers.
FIGURE B7.45. Cochlear implant.
Microphone
Stimulator wire from
microphone to speech
processor
Stimulator wire from speech
processor to external coil
Tympanic membrane
Pharyngotympanic
tube
Active
electrode
Cochlea
Cochlear
nerve
Ground electrode in
epitympanic recess
Internal coil
External coil
The ear is divided into external, middle, and internal parts. 
¨ All three parts are concerned with the sense of hearing, but 
the internal ear also has a vestibular function. ¨ The external 
ear is a funnel-like conduit for airborne sound waves to reach 
the middle ear. ¨ The protruding auricle and lateral part of 
the external acoustic meatus have an elastic cartilage skeleton 
that allows ﬂ
 exibility. ¨ The primary sensory innervation of the 
external ear is provided by CN V and CN X. ¨ The tympanic 
membrane responds to airborne sound waves, converting them 
to vibrations transmitted by the solid medium of the ossicles of 
the middle ear. ¨ Because its entire lateral wall is formed by a 
thin membrane, the middle ear (tympanic cavity) is a pressure-
sensitive space, ventilated by means of the pharyngotympanic 
tube. ¨ The mucosa lining both the cavity and tube is inner-
vated by CN IX. ¨ At the oval window, between the middle 
and internal ears, the solid medium vibrations of the ossicles 
are converted to ﬂ
 uid-borne sonar waves. ¨ The internal ear 
consists of a delicate and complex membranous labyrinth 
ﬁ
 lled with ﬂ
 uid that resembles intracellular ﬂ
 uid (endolymph), 
 
suspended within a bony cave otherwise occupied by extracel-
lular ﬂ
 uid (perilymph). ¨ Although much larger and slightly less 
complex, the architecture of the bony labyrinth is a reﬂ
 ection of 
that of the membranous labyrinth. ¨ The posterior portion of 
the bony labyrinth takes the form of three semicircular canals 
and ducts; the ampulla of each of the ducts contains an ampul-
lary crest that is sensitive to motion of the head. ¨ The central 
bony vestibule contains a membranous utricle and saccule, each 
provided with a macula to monitor the position of the head 
relative to the line of gravitational pull. ¨ The neuroepithelial 
crests and maculae are innervated by the vestibular portion of 
CN VIII. ¨ The anterior portion of the internal ear contains a 
membranous cochlear duct, suspended between two limbs of 
continuous pathway for the sonar waves that are conducted 
by the perilymph; the duct and perilymphatic channels spiral 
through the 2.5 turns of the bony cochlea. ¨ Deformation of 
the spiral organ within the cochlear duct by the sonar waves 
stimulates impulses conducted by the cochlear part of CN VIII 
for the sense of hearing.
The Bottom Line
Board-review questions, case studies, and additional resources are available at thePoint.lww.com.
