# Page 1092

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1062
OCULOMOTOR NERVE (CN III)
Functions: Somatic motor (general somatic efferent) 
and visceral motor (general visceral efferent–parasympa-
thetic).
Nuclei: There are two oculomotor nuclei, each serving 
one of the functional components of the nerve. The somatic 
motor nucleus of the oculomotor nerve is in the midbrain 
(Fig. 9.5). The visceral motor (parasympathetic) accessory 
(Edinger-Westphal) nucleus of the oculomotor nerve
lies dorsal to the rostral two thirds of the somatic motor 
nucleus (Haines, 2006).
FIGURE 9.6. Olfactory system. A. This sagittal section through the nasal cavity shows the relationship of the olfactory mucosa to the olfactory bulb. 
B. The bodies of the olfactory receptor neurons are in the olfactory epithelium. These bundles of axons are collectively called the olfactory nerve (CN I).
Olfactory bulb,
site of termination
of olfactory nerves
collectively making
up olfactory
nerve (CN I)
Olfactory tract
Lateral
olfactory stria
Central processes of olfactory 
receptor neurons = olfactory nerves 
(collectively, olfactory nerve CN I)
Subarachnoid space
Lateral olfactory stria
Olfactory bulb
Olfactory mucosa
Olfactory tract
Medial olfactory stria
Foramina
Plane of section
Frontal sinus
Olfactory nerves 
(collectively CN I)
Sphenoidal sinus
Olfactory
Bulb
Tract
Olfactory epithelium
Primary 
sensory axon
Mitral cells
Cribriform plate of
ethmoid bone
Olfactory bulb
Olfactory receptor neurons
(neurosensory cells)
Olfactory cilia
Olfactory mucosa
(A) Medial view of lateral wall of nasal cavity
(B) Medial view of sagittal section through
      cribriform plate of ethmoid bone
Cribriform plate
of ethmoid bone
Nerve fibers:
Efferent
Afferent
OPTIC NERVE
¨ The optic nerves (CN II) have sensory ﬁ
 bers concerned 
with the special sense of vision. ¨ The optic nerve ﬁ
 bers 
arise from ganglion cells in the retina. ¨ The nerve ﬁ
 bers 
exit the orbit via the optic canals; ﬁ
 bers from the nasal half 
of the retina cross to the contralateral side at the optic chi-
asm. ¨ The nerve ﬁ
 bers then pass via the optic tracts to the 
geniculate bodies of the thalamus, where they synapse on 
neurons whose processes form the optic radiations to the 
primary visual cortex of the occipital lobe.
The Bottom Line
