# Page 1081

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1051
into inferior deep cervical lymph nodes (Figs. 8.48 and 
8.51). The speciﬁ
 c group of inferior deep cervical nodes 
involved here descends across the lateral cervical region with 
the spinal accessory nerve (CN XI).
Most lymph from the six to eight lymph nodes then drains 
into the supraclavicular group of nodes, which accompany 
shared with the respiratory system. ¨ The superior, non-
collapsible nasopharynx is exclusively respiratory, and the 
air and food pathways cross within the oropharynx and 
laryngopharynx. ¨ The contractile pharynx is unique within 
the alimentary tract in being constructed of voluntary muscle 
with the circular layer (pharyngeal constrictors) external to 
longitudinal muscle, the stylopharyngeus, palatopharyn-
geus, and salpingopharyngeus. ¨ The ﬂ
 at posterior wall 
of the pharynx, abutting the musculo 
skeletal neck at the 
retropharyngeal space, is without openings; however, its 
anterior wall includes openings to the nose, mouth, and 
larynx. These openings determine the three segments of the 
pharynx. ¨ The soft palate serves as a ﬂ
 ap valve regulating 
access to or from the nasopharynx and oropharynx, whereas 
the larynx is the “valve” ultimately separating food and air 
before they enter the esophagus and trachea, respectively. 
¨ The superior two openings of the pharynx, which connect 
to the external environment, are encircled by a ring of lym-
phoid (tonsillar) tissue. ¨ Gaps in the submucosal lateral 
wall, between attachments of the pharyngeal constrictor 
muscles, permit the passage of slip-like longitudinal muscles 
and neurovascular elements. ¨ Innervation of the pharynx is 
from the pharyngeal nerve plexus, with the vagus providing 
the motor ﬁ
 bers and the glossopharyngeal providing sensory 
ﬁ
 bers. ¨ At the level of the cricoid cartilage (C6 vertebral 
level), a relatively abrupt change is made to the muscular 
pattern more typical of the alimentary tract. ¨ The cricopha-
ryngeal part of the inferior pharyngeal constrictor, the most 
inferior part of the external circular layer, forms the superior 
esophageal sphincter. ¨ Immediately inferior, as the outer 
muscular layer becomes longitudinal, the esophagus begins. 
¨ Also at approximately this point, sensory and motor inner-
vation is transferred to the recurrent laryngeal nerves. ¨ The 
cervical esophagus is composed of voluntary muscle.
LYMPHATICS OF NECK
Most superﬁ
 cial tissues in the neck are drained by lymphatic 
vessels that enter the superﬁ
 cial cervical lymph nodes,
which are located along the course of the EJV. Lymph from 
these nodes, like lymph from all of the head and neck, drains 
Cervicodorsal (transverse 
cervical) trunk
Phrenic nerve
Prevertebral fascia
Suprascapular
artery
Subclavian vein
Subclavius
Left clavicle
Muscular layer of
pretracheal layer of
(deep) cervical fascia
Sternothyroid muscle
Deep cervical
lymph nodes
Internal jugular
vein
Thoracic duct
Sternohyoid
muscle
Left venous
angle
Omohyoid
Prevertebral fascia
Jugular
lymphatic
trunk
Right 
lymphatic
duct
Left internal 
jugular vein
Thoracic duct
Left
subclavian
vein
Thoracic
duct
Descending 
thoracic
lymphatic 
trunks
Cisterna
chyli
(A) Anterior view
(B) Anterior view
Subclavian
lymphatic trunk
Anterior
sternoclavicular
ligament
FIGURE 8.51. Lymphatic vessels in root of neck. A. This overview demonstrates the course of the thoracic duct and site of the termination of the tho-
racic and right lymphatic ducts. B. This dissection of the left side shows the deep cervical lymph nodes and the termination of the thoracic duct at the junc-
tion of the subclavian and internal jugular veins (left venous angle). The cervicodorsal trunk is often called the transverse cervical artery.
