# Page 1095

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1065
The trochlear nerve (CN IV) is the smallest cranial nerve. 
It emerges from the posterior (dorsal) surface of the midbrain 
(the only cranial nerve to do so), passing anteriorly around 
the brainstem. It has the longest intracranial (subarachnoid) 
course of the cranial nerves. The trochlear nerve pierces the 
dura mater at the margin of the tentorium cerebelli, and 
passes anteriorly in the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus 
(Fig. 9.8). CN IV then continues through the superior orbital 
ﬁ
 ssure into the orbit, where it supplies the superior oblique—
the only extra-ocular muscle that uses a pulley, or trochlea, to 
redirect its line of action (hence the nerve’s name).
cutaneous innervation by spinal nerves (Fig. 9.9A). Unlike 
spinal nerve dermatomes, however, there is little overlap in 
innervation by the divisions; lesions of a single nerve result in 
clearly demarcated areas of numbness.
The ﬁ
 bers of the motor root of CN V pass inferior to 
the trigeminal ganglion along the ﬂ
 oor of the trigeminal cave, 
bypassing the ganglion (just as the anterior roots of spinal 
nerves bypass the spinal sensory ganglia). They are distributed 
exclusively via the mandibular nerve (CN V3), blending with the 
sensory ﬁ
 bers as the nerve traverses the foramen ovale in the 
cranium. Branches pass to the muscles of mastication, mylohy-
oid, anterior belly of the digastric, tensor veli palatini, and ten-
sor tympani, which are derived from the 1st pharyngeal arch.
Although CN V conveys no presynaptic parasympathetic 
ﬁ
 bers from the CNS, all four parasympathetic ganglia are 
associated with the divisions of CN V. Postsynaptic parasym-
pathetic ﬁ
 bers from the ganglia join branches of CN V and 
are carried to their destinations along with the CN V sensory 
and motor ﬁ
 bers (Fig. 9.9; Table 9.3).
Ophthalmic Nerve (CN V1)
In contrast to the other two CN V divisions, CN V1 is not 
a branchial nerve (i.e., it does not supply pharyngeal arch 
derivatives). It serves structures derived from the paraxial 
mesoderm of the embryonic frontonasal process. The oph-
thalmic nerve’s association with the other CN V divisions is a 
secondary occurrence. The somatic (general) sensory ﬁ
 bers 
of CN V1 are distributed to skin and mucous membranes and 
conjunctiva of the front of the head and nose (Fig. 9.9).
Testing CN V1: The integrity of this division is tested by 
checking the corneal reﬂ
 ex—touching the cornea, which is 
also supplied by CN V1, with a wisp of cotton will evoke a 
reﬂ
 exive blink if the nerve is functional (Table 9.4).
Maxillary Nerve (CN V2)
CN V2 innervates derivatives of the maxillary prominence of 
the 1st pharyngeal arch. Exiting the cranial cavity via the fora-
men rotundum, its somatic (general) sensory ﬁ
 bers are gener-
ally distributed to skin and mucous membranes associated with 
the upper jaw. The pterygopalatine (parasympathetic) ganglion 
is associated with this division of CN V, involved in innervating 
the lacrimal gland and glands of the nose and palate.
Mandibular Nerve (CN V3)
CN V3 innervates derivatives of the mandibular prominence 
of the 1st pharyngeal arch. CN V3 is the only division of CN V 
to convey somatic (branchial) motor ﬁ
 bers, distributed to 
the striated muscle derived from mandibular prominence 
mesoderm, primarily the muscles of mastication. Two para-
sympathetic ganglia, the otic and submandibular, are associ-
ated with this division of CN V; both are concerned with the 
innervation of salivary glands.
Tables 9.1 and 9.2 provide a general summary of CN V. 
Table 9.4 summarizes the branches of the three divisions.
TROCHLEAR NERVE
¨ The trochlear nerves (CN IV) supply somatic motor 
ﬁ
 bers to the superior oblique muscles, which abduct, 
depress, and medially rotate the pupil. ¨ The trochlear 
nerves emerge from the posterior aspect of the  
brainstem. 
¨ The nerves run a long intracranial course, passing 
around the brainstem to enter the dura mater in the free 
edge of the tentorium cerebelli close to the posterior 
clinoid process. ¨ The nerves then run in the lateral wall 
of the cavernous sinus, entering the orbit via the superior 
orbital ﬁ
 ssures.
The Bottom Line
TRIGEMINAL NERVE (CN V)
Functions: Somatic (general) sensory and somatic (bran-
chial) motor to derivatives of the 1st pharyngeal arch.
Nuclei: There are four trigeminal nuclei (Fig. 9.5)—one 
motor (motor nucleus of trigeminal nerve), and three 
sensory (mesencephalic, principal sensory and spinal 
nuclei of trigeminal nerve).
The trigeminal nerve (CN V) is the largest cranial nerve 
(if the atypical optic nerve is excluded). It emerges from the 
lateral aspect of the pons by a large sensory root and a small 
motor root (Fig. 9.3). The roots of CN V are comparable to 
the posterior and anterior roots of spinal nerves. CN V is the 
principal somatic (general) sensory nerve for the head (face, 
teeth, mouth, nasal cavity, and dura mater of the cranial cav-
ity). The large sensory root of CN V is composed mainly 
of the central processes of the pseudounipolar neurons that 
make up the sensory trigeminal ganglion (Fig. 9.9). The 
ganglion is ﬂ
 attened and crescent shaped (hence its unofﬁ
 -
cial name, semilunar ganglion), and is housed within a dural 
recess (trigeminal cave) lateral to the cavernous sinus.
The peripheral processes of the ganglionic neurons form 
three nerves or divisions: ophthalmic nerve (CN V1), maxil-
lary nerve (CN V2), and sensory component of the mandibu-
lar nerve (CN V3). Maps of the zones of cutaneous innervation 
by the three divisions resemble the dermatome maps for 
