# Page 1029

Chapter 8  •  Neck
999
the EJV superﬁ
 cial to the SCM. Efferent vessels from these 
nodes drain into the deep cervical lymph nodes, which 
form a chain along the course of the IJV embedded in the 
fascia of the carotid sheath (Figs. 8.4B and 8.14A).
Anterior Cervical Region
The anterior cervical region (anterior triangle) (Table 8.1) 
has the following:
• An anterior boundary formed by the median line of the neck.
• A posterior boundary formed by the anterior border of 
the SCM.
• A superior boundary formed by the inferior border of the 
mandible.
• An apex located at the jugular notch in the manubrium.
• A roof formed by subcutaneous tissue containing the 
 
platysma.
• A ﬂ
 oor formed by the pharynx, larynx, and thyroid gland.
For more precise localization of structures, the anterior cer-
vical region is subdivided into four smaller triangles by the 
digastric and omohyoid muscles: the unpaired submental 
triangle and three small paired triangles—submandibular, 
carotid, and muscular.
The submental triangle, inferior to the chin, is a supra-
hyoid area bounded inferiorly by the body of the hyoid and 
laterally by the right and left anterior bellies of the digastric 
muscles. The ﬂ
 oor of the submental triangle is formed by 
the two mylohyoid muscles, which meet in a median ﬁ
 brous 
raphe (Fig. 8.14B). The apex of the submental triangle is 
at the mandibular symphysis, the site of union of the halves 
of the mandible during infancy. The base of the submental 
triangle is formed by the hyoid (Fig. 8.16). This triangle con-
tains several small submental lymph nodes and small veins 
that unite to form the anterior jugular vein (Fig. 8.15).
The submandibular triangle is a glandular area between 
the inferior border of the mandible and the anterior and pos-
terior bellies of the digastric muscle (Fig. 8.14A). The ﬂ
 oor 
of the submandibular triangle is formed by the mylohyoid 
and hyoglossus muscles, and the middle pharyngeal con-
strictor. The submandibular gland nearly ﬁ
 lls this triangle 
(Fig. 8.12B). (Because of its functional association with the 
mouth as well as its anatomical association with the ﬂ
 oor of 
the mouth, the gland is discussed in Chapter 7, p. 945.)
Submandibular lymph nodes lie on each side of the 
submandibular gland and along the inferior border of the 
mandible (Fig. 8.14A). The hypoglossal nerve (CN XII) pro-
vides motor innervation to the intrinsic and extrinsic muscles 
Facial artery
Common trunk of facial
and lingual arteries
Stylohyoid
Anterior jugular vein
Sternothyroid
External laryngeal nerve
Superior thyroid artery
Thyrohyoid
Internal laryngeal nerve
Inferior pharyngeal constrictor
Mylohyoid
Submental artery
Nerve to mylohyoid
Digastric, anterior belly
Hyoid bone
Sternohyoid
Fascia investing submandibular gland
Sternocleidomastoid (SCM)
Muscular layer of pretracheal fascia
Cervicodorsal vein
Sternocleidomastoid (SCM)
Internal jugular vein (IJV)
Sternocleidomastoid branch
Ansa cervicalis
Internal carotid artery
External carotid artery
Sternocleidomastoid artery
Spinal accessory nerve (CN XI)
Occipital artery
External carotid artery
Prevertebral layer of cervical fascia
(“fascial carpet” of lateral
cervical region) 
Hypoglossal nerve (CN XII)
Superior root of ansa cervicalis
Lateral view
Common carotid artery
Clavicular head
Sternal head
Omohyoid
FIGURE 8.15. Deep dissection of anterior cervical region. The common facial vein and its tributaries have been removed, revealing arteries and nerves, 
including the ansa cervicalis and its branches to the infrahyoid muscles. The facial and lingual arteries in this person arise by a common trunk that passes 
deep to the stylohyoid and digastric muscles to enter the submandibular triangle.
