# Page 1006

Chapter 7  •  Head
976
Waves of hydraulic pressure created in the perilymph 
of the vestibule by the vibrations of the base of the stapes 
ascend to the apex of the cochlea by one channel, the scala 
vestibuli (Fig. 7.120). The pressure waves then pass through 
the helicotrema and descend back to the basal turn of the 
cochlea by the other channel, the scala tympani. Here, the 
pressure waves again become vibrations, this time of the sec-
ondary tympanic membrane in the round window, and the 
energy initially received by the (primary) tympanic mem-
brane is ﬁ
 nally dissipated into the air of the tympanic cavity.
The roof of the cochlear duct is formed by the vestibular 
membrane. The ﬂ
 oor of the duct is also formed by part of the 
duct, the basilar membrane, plus the outer edge of the osse-
ous spiral lamina. The receptor of auditory stimuli is the spiral 
organ (of Corti), situated on the basilar membrane (Fig. 7.118). 
It is overlaid by the gelatinous tectorial membrane.
The spiral organ contains hair cells, the tips of which 
are embedded in the tectorial membrane. The organ is 
stimulated to respond by deformation of the cochlear duct 
induced by the hydraulic pressure waves in the perilymph, 
Modiolus
Spiral ganglion                      
Osseous
spiral lamina
Cochlear nerve
Spiral (cochlear)
ganglion with cut edge
Otic capsule
Osseous
spiral lamina
Spiral ganglion
Cochlear
duct
Scalae
communicating
via helicotrema
(arrow)
Section of cochlea
Cochlear nerve
(enters modiolus)
Vestibular membrane
Spiral organ
Tectorial membrane
Internal spiral sulcus
Border cells
Osseous
spiral lamina
Cochlear nerve
Spiral ganglion
Cochlear duct
Vascular stria
Cells of Hensen
Spiral ligament
Basilar membrane
Outer hair cells
Scala vestibuli
Inner hair cells
Scala tympani
FIGURE 7.118. Structure of cochlea. The cochlea has been sectioned along the axis about which the cochlea winds (see orientation ﬁ
 gure). An isolated, 
cone-like, bony core of the cochlea, the modiolus, is shown after the turns of the cochlea are removed, leaving only the spiral lamina winding around it like 
the thread of a screw. Details of the area enclosed in the rectangle are also shown.
Cochlear
nerve
Spiral 
(cochlear)
ganglion
Utricle
Saccule
Ampullae of
semicircular
ducts (containing
ampullary crests)
Vestibular
ganglion
Vestibular 
nerve
Cochlear 
duct  
Cochlear 
nerve
Maculae
Vestibulocochlear
nerve (CN VIII)
Endolymphatic sac
Internal
acoustic
meatus
Vestibular
nerve
Semicircular duct
CN VIII
Medulla 
oblongata
Pons
Midbrain
FIGURE 7.119. Vestibulocochlear nerve. CN VIII has two parts: the cochlear nerve (the nerve of hearing) and the vestibular nerve (the nerve of balance). 
The cell bodies of the scensory ﬁ
 bers that make up the two parts of this nerve constitute the spiral and vestibular ganglia.
