# Page 1114

1084
Appendix A  •  References and Suggested Reading
Buxton DF, Peck D: Neuromuscular spindles relative to joint movement 
complexities. Clin Anat 2:211, 1989.
Crockard HA, Heilman AE, Stevens JM: Progressive myelopathy second-
ary to odontoid fractures: Clinical, radiological, and surgical features. 
J Neurosurg 78:579, 1993.
Duray SM, Morter HB, Smith FJ: Morphological variation in cervical spi-
nous processes: potential applications in the forensic identiﬁ
 cation of 
race from the skeleton. J Forensic Sci 44(5):937–944, 1999.
Dvorak J, Schneider E, Saldinger P, Rahn B: Biomechanics of the 
craniovertebral region: The alar and transverse ligaments. J Orthop 
Res 6:452, 1988.
Greer M: Cerebral and spinal malformations. In Rowland LP, Tedley TA 
(ed): Merritt’s Textbook of Neurology, 12th ed. Baltimore, Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2009.
Haines DE (ed): Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Appli-
cations, 3rd ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone (Elsevier), 2006.
Mercer S, Bogduk N: The ligaments and anulus ﬁ
 brosus of human adult 
cervical intervertebral discs. Spine 24:619–628, 1999.
Moore KL, Persaud TVN and Torchia MG: The Developing Human: Clini-
cally Oriented Embryology, 9th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2012.
Rickenbacher J, Landolt AM, Theiler K: Applied Anatomy of the Back. 
New York: Springer Verlag, 1985.
Standring S (ed.): Gray’s Anatomy, 40th British ed. New York, Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.
Swartz MH: Textbook of Physical Diagnosis. History and Examination, 
6th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2009.
Vilensky JA, Baltes M, Weikel L, Fortin JD, Fourie LJ: Serratus posterior mus-
cles: Anatomy, clinical relevance, and function. Clin Anat 14:237, 2001.
Yochum TR, Rowe LJ: Essentials of Skeletal Radiology, 3rd ed. Baltimore, 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2004.
CHAPTER 5
Anderson MK, Hall SJ, Martin M: Sports Injury Management, 2nd ed. 
Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
Clay JH, Pounds DM: Basic Clinical Message Therapy: Integrating 
Anatomy and Treatment, 2nd ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2008.
Foerster O: The dermatomes in man. Brain 56:1, 1933.
Ger R, Sedlin E: The accessory soleus muscle. Clin Orthop 116: 200, 1976.
Hamill J, Knutzen KM: Biomechanical Basis of Human Movement, 3rd ed. 
Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2008.
Jenkins DB: Hollinshead’s Functional Anatomy of the Limbs and Back, 
9th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2008.
Kapandji IA: The Physiology of the Joints, Vol. 2. Lower Limb, 5th ed. 
Edinburgh, Churchill Livingstone, 1987.
Keegan JJ, Garrett FD: The segmental distribution of the cutaneous 
nerves in the limbs of man. Anat Rec 102:409, 1948.
Kendall FP, McCreary EK, Provance PG, Rodgers M, Romani W: Mus-
cles: Testing and Function with Posture and Gait, 5th ed. Baltimore, 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
Markhede G, Stener G: Function after removal of various hip and thigh 
muscles for extirpation of tumors. Acta Orthop Scand 52:373, 1981.
Moore KL, Persaud TVN and Torchia MG: The Developing Human. 
 
Clinically Oriented Embryology, 9th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2012.
Palastanga N, Soames RW: Anatomy and Human Movement, 6th ed. 
 
Edinburgh, Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier, 2011.
Rancho Los Amigos National Rehabilitation Center Pathokinesiology 
Service and Physical Therapy Department: Observational Gait 
 
Analysis. Downey, CA, Los Amigos Research and Education 
Institute, Inc., 2001.
Rose J, Gamble JG: Human Walking, 3rd ed. Baltimore, Lippincott 
 
Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
Salter RB: Textbook of Disorders and Injuries of the Musculoskeletal 
 
System, 3rd ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
Soderberg GL: Kinesiology: Application to Pathological Motion. Baltimore: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1986.
Moore KL, Persaud TVN and Torchia MG: The Developing Human. 
 
Clinically Oriented Embryology, 9th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/ 
Elsevier, 2012.
Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology, 
2nd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2000.
Rosse C, Gaddum-Rosse P: Hollinshead’s Textbook of Anatomy, 5th ed. 
Philadelphia, Lippincott-Raven, 1997.
Sabiston DC Jr, Lyerly H (eds): Sabiston Essentials of Surgery, 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia, Saunders, 1994.
Skandalakis JE, Skandalakis PN, Skandalakis LJ: Surgical Anatomy and 
Technique. A Pocket Manual. 3rd ed. New York, Springer-Verlag, 2009.
Skandalakis LJ, Gadacz TR, Mansberger AR Jr, Mitchell WE Jr, Colborn 
GL, Skandalakis JE: Modern Hernia Repair. The Embryology of 
 
Anatomical Basis of Surgery. New York, Parthenon, 1996.
Standring S (ed.): Gray’s Anatomy: The Anatomical Basis of Clinical 
 
Practice, 40th British ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 2008.
Swartz MH: Textbook of Physical Diagnosis, History and Examination, 
6th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2009.
Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL: Sabiston 
 
Textbook of Surgery, 19th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2012.
CHAPTER 3
Ashton-Miller JA, DeLancey JOL: Functional Anatomy of Female Pelvic 
Floor. Annals of NY Academy of Science, 11001:266–296 (2007).
Copeland LJ (ed): Textbook of Gynecology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, 
Saunders, 2000.
DeLancey JOL: Anatomic aspects of vaginal eversion after hysterectomy. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:1717–1728 (1992).
Federative International Committee on Anatomical Terminology 
[FICAT]: Terminologia Anatomica: International Anatomical 
 
Nomenclature. Stuttgart, Thieme, 1998.
Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Galan HL, Jauniaux ERM, Landon MB, Simpson 
JL, Driscoll DA: Obstetrics—Normal and Problem Pregnancies, 6th ed. 
Saunders/Elsevier, 2012.
Krebs H-B: Premalignant lesions of the cervix. In Copeland LJ (ed): 
Textbook of Gynecology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2000.
Moore KL, Persaud TVN and Torchia MG: The Developing Human. Clini-
cally Oriented Embryology, 9th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2012.
Morris M, Burke TW: Cervical cancer. In Copeland LJ (ed): Textbook of 
Gynecology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2000.
Myers RP, Cahill DR, Devine RM, King BF: Anatomy of radical prosta-
tectomy as deﬁ
 ned by magnetic resonance imaging. J Urol 159:2148, 
1998a.
Myers RP, King BF, Cahill DR: Deep perineal “space” as deﬁ
 ned by 
magnetic resonance imaging. Clin Anat 11:132, 1998b.
Oelrich TM: The urethral sphincter muscle in the male. Am J Anat 158:229, 
1980.
Oelrich TM: The striated urogenital sphincter muscle in the female. Anat 
Rec 205:223, 1983.
Wendell-Smith CP: Muscles and fasciae of the pelvis. In Williams PL, 
Bannister LH, Berry MM, Collins P, Dussek JE, Fergusson MWJ (eds): 
Gray’s Anatomy, The Anatomical Basis of Medicine and Surgery, 
38th ed. Edinburgh, Churchill-Livingstone, 1995.
CHAPTER 4
Bergman RA, Thompson SA, Aﬁ
 ﬁ
  AK, Saadeh FA: Compendium of Human 
Anatomic Variation. Text, Atlas, and World Literature. Baltimore, 
Urban & Schwarzenberg, 1988. This useful source has been updated 
and is available from the Virtual Hospital’s Web site Illustrated Encyclo-
pedia of Human Anatomic Variation at www.vh.org/Providers/
Textbooks/AnatomicVariants/AnatomyHP.html, 2008.
Bogduk N: Clinical and Radiological Anatomy of the Lumbar Spine and 
Sacrum, 4th ed. London: Churchill Livingstone (Elsevier), 2005.
Bogduk N, Macintosh JE: Applied anatomy of the thoracolumbar fascia. 
Spine 9:164, 1984.
