# Page 1073

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1043
laryngeal nerve is intimately related to the inferior thyroid 
artery and its branches (Fig. B8.10). This nerve may cross 
anterior or posterior to branches of the artery, or it may pass 
between them. Because of this close relationship, the inferior 
thyroid artery is ligated some distance lateral to the thyroid 
gland, where it is not close to the nerve. Although the danger 
of injuring the left recurrent laryngeal nerve during surgery 
is not as great, owing to its more vertical ascent from the 
superior mediastinum, the artery and nerve are also closely 
associated near the inferior pole of the thyroid gland (Fig. 
8.27). Hoarseness is the usual sign of unilateral recurrent 
nerve injury; however, temporary aphonia or disturbance of 
phonation (voice production) and laryngeal spasm may occur. 
These signs usually result from bruising the recurrent laryn-
geal nerves during surgery or from the pressure of accumu-
lated blood and serous exudate after the operation.
Inadvertent Removal 
of Parathyroid Glands
The variable position of the parathyroid glands, espe-
cially the inferior ones, puts them in danger of being 
damaged or removed during surgical procedures in 
the neck. The superior parathyroid glands may be as far supe-
rior as the thyroid cartilage, and the inferior glands may be as 
far inferior as the superior mediastinum (Fig. 8.30B). The 
aberrant sites of these glands are of concern when searching 
for abnormal parathyroid glands, as may be necessary in treat-
ing parathyroid adenoma, an ordinarily benign tumor of epi-
thelial tissue associated with hyperparathyroidism.
Atrophy or inadvertent surgical removal of all the para-
thyroid glands results in tetany, a severe neurologic syn-
drome characterized by muscle twitches and cramps. The 
generalized spasms are caused by decreased serum cal-
cium levels. Because laryngeal and respiratory muscles are 
involved, failure to respond immediately with appropri-
ate therapy can result in death. To safeguard these glands 
Thyroidectomy
Excision of a malignant tumor of the thyroid gland, 
or other surgical procedure, sometimes necessitates 
removal of part or all of the gland (hemithyroidec-
tomy or thyroidectomy). In the surgical treatment of hyper-
thyroidism, the posterior part of each lobe of the enlarged 
thyroid is usually preserved, a procedure called near-total 
thyroidectomy, to protect the recurrent and superior laryn-
geal nerves and to spare the parathyroid glands. Postoperative 
hemorrhage after thyroid gland surgery may compress the 
trachea, making breathing difﬁ
 cult. The blood collects within 
the ﬁ
 brous capsule of the gland.
Injury to Recurrent Laryngeal Nerves
The risk of injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerves 
is ever present during neck surgery. Near the infe-
rior pole of the thyroid gland, the right recurrent 
(A)
(B) 
Goiter
FIGURE B8.9. Enlarged thyroid. A. Individual with a goiter. B. Scinti-
gram showing a diffuse, enlarged thyroid gland.
Internal jugular vein
Common carotid artery
Sympathetic
trunk
Prevertebral
fascia
Right
recurrent
laryngeal
nerve
Ascending 
cervical arteries
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Right subclavian
artery
Common carotid
artery
Thyroid branches
of inferior thyroid
artery
Thyroid gland
Subclavian
vein
FIGURE B8.10.
