# Page 1068

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1038
the plexus are derived from the glossopharyngeal nerve. They 
are distributed to all three parts of the pharynx. In addition, 
the mucous membrane of the anterior and superior nasophar-
ynx receives innervation from the maxillary nerve (CN V2). The 
tonsillar nerves are derived from the tonsillar plexus of nerves 
formed by branches of the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves.
ESOPHAGUS
The esophagus is a muscular tube that connects the pharynx to 
the stomach. It begins in the neck where it is continuous with the 
laryngopharynx at the pharyngo-esophageal junction (Figs. 
8.42 and 8.46B). The esophagus consists of striated (voluntary) 
muscle in its upper third, smooth (involuntary) muscle in its lower 
third, and a mixture of striated and smooth muscle in between.
Its ﬁ
 rst part, the cervical esophagus, is part of the vol-
untary upper third. It begins immediately posterior to, and at 
the level of, the inferior border of the cricoid cartilage in the 
median plane. This is the level of the C6 vertebra.
Externally, the pharyngo-esophageal junction appears as 
a constriction produced by the cricopharyngeal part of 
the inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscle (the superior 
esophageal sphincter) and is the narrowest part of the esopha-
gus. The cervical esophagus inclines slightly to the left as it 
descends and enters the superior mediastinum via the superior 
thoracic aperture, where it becomes the thoracic esophagus.
When the esophagus is empty, it is a slit-like lumen. When 
a food bolus descends in it, the lumen expands, eliciting reﬂ
 ex 
peristalsis in the inferior two thirds of the esophagus. The 
cervical esophagus lies between the trachea and the cervi-
cal vertebral column (Figs. 8.41 and 8.43A). It is attached to 
the trachea by loose connective tissue. The recurrent laryn-
geal nerves lie in or near the tracheo-esophageal grooves 
between the trachea and esophagus (Fig. 8.46). On the right 
of the esophagus is the right lobe of the thyroid gland and the 
right carotid sheath and its contents.
The esophagus is in contact with the cervical pleura at the 
root of the neck. On the left is the left lobe of the thyroid 
gland and the left carotid sheath. The thoracic duct adheres 
to the left side of the esophagus and lies between the pleura 
and the esophagus. For details concerning the thoracic and 
abdominal regions of the esophagus, see Chapters 1 and 2.
Vessels of Cervical Esophagus. The arteries to the 
cervical esophagus are branches of the inferior thyroid arter-
ies. Each artery gives off ascending and descending branches 
that anastomose with each other and across the midline. 
Veins from the cervical esophagus are tributaries of the infe-
rior thyroid veins. Lymphatic vessels of the cervical part of 
the esophagus drain into the paratracheal lymph nodes and 
inferior deep cervical lymph nodes (Fig. 8.48).
Nerves of Cervical Esophagus. The nerve supply to the 
esophagus is somatic motor and sensory to the upper half and 
parasympathetic (vagal), sympathetic, and visceral sensory to 
the lower half. The cervical esophagus receives somatic ﬁ
 bers 
via branches from the recurrent laryngeal nerves and vasomo-
tor ﬁ
 bers from the cervical sympathetic trunks through the 
plexus around the inferior thyroid artery (Fig. 8.46).
plexus of nerves that is formed by pharyngeal branches of 
the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves and by sympathetic 
branches from the superior cervical ganglion (Fig. 8.46A; 
Table 8.6). The pharyngeal plexus lies on the lateral wall of 
the pharynx, mainly on the middle pharyngeal constrictor.
The overlapping of the pharyngeal constrictor muscles 
leaves four gaps in the musculature for structures to enter or 
leave the pharynx (Fig. 8.47):
1. Superior to the superior pharyngeal constrictor, the leva-
tor veli palatini, pharyngotympanic tube, and ascending 
palatine artery pass through a gap between the superior 
pharyngeal constrictor and the cranium. It is here that the 
pharyngobasilar fascia blends with the buccopharyngeal 
fascia to form, with the mucous membrane, the thin wall 
of the pharyngeal recess (Fig. 8.42).
2. A gap between the superior and middle pharyngeal con-
strictors forms a passageway that allows the stylopharyn-
geus, glossopharyngeal nerve, and stylohyoid ligament to 
pass to the internal aspect of the pharyngeal wall (Fig 8.47).
3. A gap between the middle and inferior pharyngeal con-
strictors allows the internal laryngeal nerve and superior 
laryngeal artery and vein to pass to the larynx.
4. A gap inferior to the inferior pharyngeal constrictor allows 
the recurrent laryngeal nerve and inferior laryngeal artery 
to pass superiorly into the larynx.
Vessels of Pharynx. A branch of the facial artery, the 
tonsillar artery (Fig. 8.44B) passes through the superior pha-
ryngeal constrictor muscle and enters the inferior pole of the 
palatine tonsil. The tonsil also receives arterial twigs from the 
ascending palatine, lingual, descending palatine, and ascending 
pharyngeal arteries. The large external palatine vein (para-
tonsillar vein) descends from the soft palate and passes close to 
the lateral surface of the tonsil before it enters the pharyngeal 
venous plexus.
The tonsillar lymphatic vessels pass laterally and 
inferiorly to the lymph nodes near the angle of the man-
dible and the jugulodigastric node, referred to as the 
tonsillar node because of its frequent enlargement when 
the tonsil is inﬂ
 amed (tonsillitis) (Fig. 8.48). The palatine, 
lingual, and pharyngeal tonsils form the pharyngeal lym-
phatic (tonsillar) ring, an incomplete circular band of 
lymphoid tissue around the superior part of the pharynx 
(Fig. 8.49). The antero-inferior part of the ring is formed 
by the lingual tonsil in the posterior part of the tongue. 
Lateral parts of the ring are formed by the palatine and 
tubal tonsils, and posterior and superior parts are formed 
by the pharyngeal tonsil.
Pharyngeal Nerves. The nerve supply to the pharynx 
(motor and most of sensory) derives from the pharyngeal 
plexus of nerves (Fig. 8.46A). Motor ﬁ
 bers in the plexus are 
derived from the vagus nerve (CN X) via its pharyngeal branch 
or branches. They supply all muscles of the pharynx and soft 
palate, except the stylopharyngeus (supplied by CN IX) and the 
tensor veli palatini (supplied by CN V3). The inferior pharyngeal 
constrictor also receives some motor ﬁ
 bers from the external 
and recurrent laryngeal branches of the vagus. Sensory ﬁ
 bers in 
