# Page 1116

1086
Appendix A  •  References and Suggested Reading
Lachman N, Acland RD, Rosse C: Anatomical evidence for the absence of 
a morphologically distinct cranial root of the accessory nerve in man. 
Clin Anat 15:4, 2002.
Lynch JC, Corbett JJ, Hutchins JB: The visual system. In Haines DE (ed): 
Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications, 3rd ed. 
New York, Churchill Livingstone (Elsevier), 2006.
Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Torchia MG: The Developing Human. 
 
Clinically Oriented Embryology, 9th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2012.
Rowland LP, Pedley TA (ed): Merritt’s Textbook of Neurology, 12th ed. 
Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010.
Simpson KL, Sweazey RD: Olfaction and taste. In Haines DE (ed): 
 
Fundamental Neuro 
science for Basic and Clinical Applications, 3rd ed. 
New York, Churchill Livingstone (Elsevier), 2006.
Storper IS, Roberts JK: Dizziness, vertigo, and hearing loss. In Rowland LP, 
Pedley TA (ed): Merritt’s Textbook of Neurology, 12th ed. Baltimore, 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010.
Swartz MH: Textbook of Physical Diagnosis: History and Diagnosis, 
6th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2009.
Weimer LH, Latov N: Peripheral Neuropathies—General consid-
erations. In Rowland LP, Pedley TA (ed) Merritt’s Textbook of 
 
Neurology, 12th ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010.
Wilson-Pauwels L, Akesson EJ, Stewart PA: Cranial Nerves: Anatomy and 
Clinical Comments. Toronto, Decker, 1998.
CHAPTER 9
Agur, AMR, Dalley AF: Grant’s Atlas of Anatomy, 13th ed. Baltimore, 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013.
Brannagan TH, Weimer LH: Cranial and peripheral nerve lesions. 
In  
Rowland LP, Pedley TA (ed): Merritt’s Textbook of Neurology, 12th 
ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010.
Bruce JN: Tumors of the skull and cranial nerves. In Rowland LP, 
 
Pedley TA (ed): Merritt’s Textbook of Neurology, 12th ed. Baltimore, 
 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010.
Elkind MSV, Sacco RL: Pathogenesis, classiﬁ
 cation, and epidemiology 
of cerebrovascular disease. In Rowland LP, Pedley TA (ed): Merritt’s 
Textbook of Neurology, 12th ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2010.
Haines DE: Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applica-
tions, 3rd ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone (Elsevier), 2006.
Haines DE: Neuroanatomy: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, and Systems, 
8th ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011.
Haines DE, Mihailoff GA: An overview of the brainstem. In Haines DE 
(ed): Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications, 
3rd ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 2005.
Kiernan JA: Barr’s the Human Nervous System: An Anatomical Viewpoint, 
9th ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2008.
