# Page 1012

Chapter 8  •  Neck
OVERVIEW
The neck is the transitional area between the base of the cra-
nium superiorly and the clavicles inferiorly. The neck joins 
the head to the trunk and limbs, serving as a major conduit 
for structures passing between them. In addition, several 
important organs with unique functions are located here: the 
larynx and the thyroid and parathyroid glands, for example.
The neck is relatively slender to allow the ﬂ
 exibility nec-
essary to position the head to maximize the efﬁ
 ciency of its 
sensory organs (mainly the eyeballs but also the ears, mouth, 
and nose). Thus, many important structures are crowded 
together in the neck, such as muscles, glands, arteries, veins, 
nerves, lymphatics, trachea, esophagus, and vertebrae. Con-
sequently, the neck is a well-known region of vulnerability. 
Further, several vital structures, including the trachea, esoph-
agus, and thyroid gland, lack the bony protection afforded 
other parts of the systems to which these structures belong.
The main arterial blood ﬂ
 ow to the head and neck (the 
carotid arteries) and the principal venous drainage (the jugu-
lar veins) lie anterolaterally in the neck (Fig. 8.1). Carotid/ jug-
ular blood vessels are the major structures commonly injured 
in penetrating wounds of the neck. The brachial plexuses of 
nerves originate in the neck and pass inferolaterally to enter 
the axillae and continue into and supply the upper limbs.
In the middle of the anterior aspect of the neck is the 
thyroid cartilage, the largest of the cartilages of the larynx, 
and the trachea. Lymph from structures in the head and neck 
drains into cervical lymph nodes.
BONES OF NECK
The skeleton of the neck is formed by the cervical vertebrae, 
hyoid bone, manubrium of the sternum, and clavicles (Figs. 
8.2 and 8.3). These bones are parts of the axial skeleton except 
the clavicles, which are part of the appendicular skeleton.
Cervical Vertebrae
Seven cervical vertebrae form the cervical region of the ver-
tebral column, which encloses the spinal cord and meninges. 
The stacked, centrally placed vertebral bodies support the 
head, and the intervertebral (IV) articulations—especially 
the craniovertebral joints at its superior end—provide the 
ﬂ
 exibility necessary to allow positioning of the head.
982
Digastric (anterior belly)
Mylohyoid
Mandible
Stylohyoid
Internal carotid artery
Thyroid cartilage
Sternocleidomastoid (SCM)
Cricoid cartilage
Sternothyroid
Brachial plexus
Omohyoid
(inferior belly)
Trachea
Anterior view
Trapezius
External jugular
vein (EJV)
Hyoid bone
External jugular vein
Superior thyroid vein
Left vagus nerve
Internal jugular 
vein (IJV)
Common carotid
artery
Subclavian vein
Thoracic duct
Thyroid gland
Left brachiocephalic
vein
Recurrent laryngeal
nerve
Middle thyroid vein
Brachial plexus
Deep cervical
lymph node
Inferior thyroid vein
FIGURE 8.1. Dissection of anterior neck. The fascia has been removed and the muscles on the left side have been reﬂ
 ected to show the hyoid bone, 
 
thyroid gland, and structures related to the carotid sheath: carotid artery, internal jugular vein (IJV), vagus nerve (CN X), and deep cervical lymph nodes.
