# Page 1091

Chapter 9  •  Summary of  Cranial Nerves
1061
OPTIC NERVE (CN II)
Function: Special sensory (special somatic afferent)—that 
is, the special sense of vision.
Although ofﬁ
 cially nerves by convention, the optic 
nerves (CN II) develop in a completely different man-
ner from the other cranial nerves. The structures involved 
in receiving and transmitting optical stimuli (the optical 
ﬁ
 bers and neural retina, together with the pigmented epi-
thelium of the eyeball) develop as evaginations of the dien-
cephalon. The optic nerves are paired, anterior extensions 
of the forebrain (diencephalon) and are therefore actually 
CNS ﬁ
 ber tracts formed by axons of retinal ganglion 
cells (Moore et al., 2012). In other words, they are third-
order neurons, with their cell bodies located in the retina 
(Fig. 9.7B).
The optic nerves are surrounded by extensions of the 
cranial meninges and subarachnoid space, which is ﬁ
 lled 
with cerebrospinal ﬂ
 uid (CSF). The meninges extend all the 
way to the eyeball. The central artery and vein of the retina 
traverse the meningeal layers and course in the anterior 
part of the optic nerve. Cranial nerve II begins where the 
 
unmyelinated axons of retinal ganglion cells pierce the sclera 
(the opaque part of the external ﬁ
 brous coat of the eyeball) 
and become myelin 
ated, deep to the optic disc.
The nerve passes posteromedially in the orbit, exiting 
through the optic canal to enter the middle cranial fossa, 
where it forms the optic chiasm (Fig. 9.7A). Here, ﬁ
 bers 
from the nasal (medial) half of each retina decussate in the 
chiasm and join uncrossed ﬁ
 bers from the temporal (lateral) 
half of the retina to form the optic tract.
The partial crossing of optic nerve ﬁ
 bers in the chiasm is 
a requirement for binocular vision, allowing depth-of-ﬁ
 eld 
perception (three-dimensional vision). Thus ﬁ
 bers from the 
right halves of both retinas form the right optic tract. The 
decussation of nerve ﬁ
 bers in the chiasm results in the right 
optic tract conveying impulses from the left visual ﬁ
 eld and 
vice versa. The visual ﬁ
 eld is what is seen by a person who has 
both eyes wide open and who is looking straight ahead. Most 
ﬁ
 bers in the optic tracts terminate in the lateral ge 
niculate 
bodies of the thalamus. From these nuclei, axons are relayed 
to the visual cortices of the occipital lobes of the brain.
Mesencephalic nucleus of trigeminal nerve (CN V)
Principal sensory nucleus of trigeminal nerve (CN V)
Spinal nucleus of trigeminal nerve (CN V)
Nuclei of solitary
tract (CNs VII, IX,
and X)
Rostral (gustatory)
nucleus
Caudal (visceral or
cardiorespiratory)
nucleus
Vestibular nuclei (CN VIII)
Cochlear nuclei (CN VIII)
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Superior colliculus (midbrain)
Fasciculus gracilis of medulla oblongata
Nucleus of oculomotor nerve (CN III)
Accessory (Edinger-Westphal)
nucleus of oculomotor nerve (CN III)
Nucleus of trochlear nerve (CN IV)
Nucleus of abducent nerve (CN VI)
Superior salivatory nucleus (CN VII)
Sulcus limitans (on floor of fourth ventricle)
Inferior salivatory nucleus (CN IX)
Posterior (motor) nucleus of vagus nerve (CN X)
Nucleus of hypoglossal nerve (CN XII)
Nucleus ambiguus (CNs IX, X)
Nucleus of accessory nerve (CN XI)
Motor nucleus of trigeminal nerve (CN V)
Motor nucleus of facial nerve (CN VII)
Posterior (dorsal) view
Somatic motor
Branchial motor
Visceral motor
(parasympathetic)
Motor nuclei:
Visceral sensory
Special sensory
General sensory
Sensory nuclei:
FIGURE 9.5. Cranial nerve nuclei.
