# Page 96

Introduction to Clinically Oriented 
 Anatomy
66
images are produced and viewed digitally on monitors instead 
of ﬁ
 lm. In a radiologic examination, a highly penetrating beam 
of X-rays transilluminates the patient, showing tissues of dif-
fering densities of mass within the body as images of differing 
intensities (areas of relative light and dark) on the ﬁ
 lm or moni-
tor (Fig. I.50). A tissue or organ that is relatively dense in mass 
(e.g., compact bone) absorbs or reﬂ
 ects more X-rays than does 
a less dense tissue (e.g., spongy bone). Consequently, a dense 
tissue or organ produces a somewhat transparent area on the 
X-ray ﬁ
 lm or bright area on a monitor because fewer X-rays 
reach the ﬁ
 lm or detector. A dense substance is radiopaque, 
whereas a substance of less density is radiolucent.
Many of the same principles that apply to making a shadow 
apply to conventional radiography. When making a shadow of 
your hand on a wall, the closer your hand is to the wall, the 
sharper the shadow produced. The farther your hand is from 
the wall (and therefore the closer to the light source), the 
more the shadow is magniﬁ
 ed. Radiographs are made with 
the part of the patient’s body being studied close to the X-ray 
ﬁ
 lm or detector to maximize the clarity of the image and min-
imize magniﬁ
 cation artifacts. In basic radiologic nomencla-
ture, postero 
-anterior (PA) projection refers to a radiograph 
in which the X-rays traversed the patient from posterior (P) 
to anterior (A); the X-ray tube was posterior to the patient 
and the X-ray ﬁ
 lm or detector was anterior (Fig. I.51A). 
A radio 
graph using anteroposterior (AP) projection radiogra-
phy is the opposite. Both PA and AP projection radio 
graphs 
are viewed as if you and the patient were facing each other 
(the patient’s right side is opposite your left); this is referred 
to as an anteroposterior (AP) view. (Thus the standard chest 
X-ray, taken to examine the heart and lungs, is an AP view of 
MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNIQUES
Radiologic anatomy is the study of the structure and func-
tion of the body using medical imaging techniques. It is an 
important part of clinical anatomy and is the anatomic basis 
of radiology, the branch of medical science dealing with the 
use of radiant energy in the diagnosis and treatment of dis-
ease. Being able to identify normal structures on radiographs 
(X-rays) makes it easier to recognize the changes caused by 
disease and injury. Familiarity with medical imaging tech-
niques commonly used in clinical settings enables one to 
recognize congenital anomalies, tumors, and fractures. The 
most commonly used medical imaging techniques are
• Conventional radiography (X-ray images).
• Computerized tomography (CT).
• Ultrasonography (US).
• Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
• Nuclear medicine imaging.
Although the techniques differ, each is based on the receipt of 
attenuated beams of energy that have been passed through, 
reﬂ
 ected off of, or generated by the body’s tissues. Medical 
imaging techniques permit the observation of anatomical 
structures in living people and the study of their movements in 
normal and abnormal activities (e.g., the heart and stomach).
Conventional Radiography
Conventional radiographic studies, in which special techniques 
such as contrast media have not been used, is referred to 
clinically as plain ﬁ
 lm studies (Fig. I.49), although today most 
Trachea
Clavicle
Coracoid process
of scapula
Arch of aorta
Pulmonary artery
Left auricle
Left ventricle
Apex of heart
Right dome of
diaphragm
Right atrium
Rib
Superior vena
cava
1st rib
FIGURE I.49. Radiograph of thorax (chest). AP view of a PA projection radiograph demonstrates the arch of the aorta, parts of the heart, and domes of 
the diaphragm. Note that the dome of the diaphragm is higher on the right side. (Courtesy of Dr. E. L. Lansdown, Professor of Medical Imaging, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.)
