# Page 1078

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1048
Adenoiditis
Inﬂ
 ammation of the pharyngeal tonsils (adenoids—
Fig. 8.43) is called adenoiditis, which can obstruct 
the passage of air from the nasal cavities through the 
choanae into the nasopharynx, making mouth breathing nec-
essary. Infection from the enlarged pharyngeal tonsils may 
spread to the tubal tonsils, causing swelling and closure of the 
pharyngotympanic tubes. Impairment of hearing may result 
from nasal obstruction and blockage of the pharyngotympanic 
tubes. Infection spreading from the nasopharynx to the mid-
dle ear causes otitis media (middle ear infection), which may 
produce temporary or permanent hearing loss. Sometimes 
the palatine and pharyngeal tonsils are removed during the 
same operation (tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy; T&A).
Branchial Fistula
A branchial ﬁ
 stula is an abnormal canal that opens 
internally into the tonsillar sinus (fossa) and exter-
nally on the side of the neck (Fig. B8.15A). Saliva 
may drip from the ﬁ
 stula, which may become infected. This 
uncommon cervical canal results from persistence of rem-
nants of the 2nd pharyngeal pouch and 2nd pharyngeal 
groove (Moore et al., 2012). The ﬁ
 stula ascends from its cer-
vical opening, usually along the anterior border of the SCM 
in the inferior third of the neck. It ﬁ
 rst passes through the 
subcutaneous tissue, platysma, and fascia of the neck to enter 
the carotid sheath. It then passes between the internal and 
the external carotid arteries on its way to its opening in the 
tonsillar sinus. Its course can be demonstrated by radiogra-
phy (Fig. B8.15B).
Branchial Sinuses and Cysts
When the embryonic cervical sinus fails to disap-
pear, it may retain its connection with the lateral 
surface of the neck by a branchial sinus, a narrow 
canal. The opening of the sinus may be anywhere along 
the anterior border of the SCM (Fig. B8.16). If a remnant 
of the cervical sinus is not connected with the surface, it 
may form a branchial cyst (lateral cervical cyst), usually 
located just inferior to the angle of the mandible. Although 
branchial cysts may be present in infants and children, 
Head
Fistula
Cutaneous opening of
branchial fistula
(A)
(B)
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Branchial fistula
External carotid artery
Fistula passing deep to
external carotid artery
FIGURE B8.15. Branchial ﬁ
 stula.
Possible location of
branchial sinuses     
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Possible location
of branchial cysts
Manubrium of sternum
FIGURE B8.16. Branchial sinuses.
