# Page 1065

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1035
superior  
pharyngeal constrictor and the thin, ﬁ
 brous sheet 
of  
pharyngobasilar fascia (Fig. 8.46A & B). This fascia 
blends with the periosteum of the cranial base and deﬁ
 nes 
the limits of the pharyngeal wall in its superior part.
The laryngopharynx lies posterior to the larynx (Figs. 
8.41A and 8.43), extending from the superior border of the 
epiglottis and the pharyngo-epiglottic folds to the inferior 
The palatine tonsils are collections of lymphoid tissue on 
each side of the oropharynx in the interval between the pala-
tine arches (Figs. 8.43 and 8.44A). The tonsil does not ﬁ
 ll 
the tonsillar sinus (fossa) between the palatoglossal and 
palatopharyngeal arches in adults. The submucosal tonsil-
lar bed, in which the palatine tonsil lies, is between these 
arches (Fig. 8.44B). The tonsillar bed is formed by the 
Hard
palate 
Trachea
Bolus
Soft
palate
Pharyngeal
ridge
Thoracic inlet
of esophagus
Tongue
Epiglottis
Bolus
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Esophagus
Deglutition (swallowing)
Laryngeal inlet
Trachea
Ridge
FIGURE 8.45. Deglutition. A. The bolus of food is squeezed to the back of the mouth by pushing the tongue against the palate. B. The nasopharynx is 
sealed off and the larynx is elevated, enlarging the pharynx to receive food. C. The pharyngeal sphincters contract sequentially, creating a “peristaltic ridge,” 
squeezing food into the esophagus. The epiglottis deﬂ
 ects the bolus from but does not close the inlet to the larynx and trachea. D. The bolus of food moves 
down the esophagus by peristaltic contractions.
Digastric, posterior belly
Glossopharyngeal nerve
(CN IX)
Internal jugular vein
Internal carotid artery
Styloid process
Stylohyoid
Esophagus
Right recurrent laryngeal nerve
Inferior thyroid artery
Thyroid gland
Inferior pharyngeal constrictor
Pharyngeal raphe
Greater horn of hyoid bone
Middle pharyngeal constrictor
Medial pterygoid
Stylopharyngeus
Pharyngeal plexus of nerves
Cricopharyngeal part of inferior constrictor
Pharyngobasilar fascia
Superior
pharyngeal
constrictor
CN XI
CN IX
CN XII
(A) Posterior view
Left recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Inferior cervical
sympathetic ganglion
Middle cervical
sympathetic ganglion
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Sympathetic trunk and plexus
Common carotid artery
Superior laryngeal nerve
Superior cervical
sympathetic ganglion
Hypoglossal nerve (CN XII)
External carotid artery
Parotid gland
Spinal accessory nerve (CN XI)
Sternocleidomastoid
Sensory ganglion of vagus nerve
(CN X)
FIGURE 8.46. Pharynx and cranial nerves. A. This dissection shows the posterior aspect of the pharynx and associated structures. The buccopharyngeal 
fascia has been removed. Of the three pharyngeal constrictor muscles, the inferior muscle overlaps the middle one and the middle one overlaps the superior 
one. All three muscles form a common median pharyngeal raphe posteriorly.
