# Page 1000

Chapter 7  •  Head
970
5. The mastoid wall (posterior wall) features an opening 
in its superior part, the aditus (L. access) to the mastoid 
antrum, connecting the tympanic cavity to the mastoid 
cells; the canal for the facial nerve descends between the 
posterior wall and the antrum, medial to the aditus.
6. The anterior carotid wall separates the tympanic cav-
ity from the carotid canal; superiorly, it has the opening 
of the pharyngotympanic tube and the canal for the 
tensor tympani.
The mastoid antrum is a cavity in the mastoid process of the 
temporal bone (Fig. 7.114A). The antrum (L. from G., cave), 
like the tympanic cavity, is separated from the middle cranial 
fossa by a thin plate of the temporal bone, called the tegmen 
tympani. This structure forms the tegmental wall (roof) for 
the ear cavities and is also part of the ﬂ
 oor of the lateral part 
of the middle cranial fossa. The mastoid antrum is the com-
mon cavity into which the mastoid cells open. The antrum 
and mastoid cells are lined by mucous membrane that is con-
tinuous with the lining of the middle ear. Antero 
-inferiorly, 
the antrum is related to the canal for the facial nerve.
PHARYNGOTYMPANIC TUBE
The pharyngotympanic tube (auditory tube) connects the 
tympanic cavity to the nasopharynx, where it opens posterior 
to the inferior nasal meatus (Fig. 7.113). The posterolateral 
third of the tube is bony, and the remainder is cartilaginous. 
The pharyngotympanic tube is lined by mucous membrane 
that is continuous posteriorly with that of the tympanic cavity 
and anteriorly with that of the nasopharynx.
The function of the pharyngotympanic tube is to equalize 
pressure in the middle ear with the atmospheric pressure, 
thereby allowing free movement of the tympanic membrane. 
By allowing air to enter and leave the tympanic cavity, this 
tube balances the pressure on both sides of the membrane. 
Because the walls of the cartilaginous part of the tube are 
normally in apposition, the tube must be actively opened. 
The tube is opened by the expanding girth of the belly of 
the levator veli palatini as it contracts longitudinally, push-
ing against one wall while the tensor veli palatini pulls on the 
other. Because these are muscles of the soft palate, equaliz-
ing pressure (“popping the eardrums”) is commonly associ-
ated with activities such as yawning and swallowing.
The arteries of the pharyngotympanic tube are derived 
from the ascending pharyngeal artery, a branch of the exter-
nal carotid artery, and the middle meningeal artery and 
artery of the pterygoid canal, branches of the maxillary artery 
(Fig. 7.115; Table 7.12).
The veins of the pharyngotympanic tube drain into the 
pterygoid venous plexus. Lymphatic drainage of the tube 
is to the deep cervical lymph nodes (Fig. 7.111B).
The nerves of the pharyngotympanic tube arise from 
the tympanic plexus (Fig. 7.114B), which is formed by ﬁ
 bers of 
the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX). Anteriorly, the tube also 
receives ﬁ
 bers from the pterygopalatine ganglion (Fig. 7.106A).
AUDITORY OSSICLES
The auditory ossicles form a mobile chain of small bones 
across the tympanic cavity from the tympanic membrane to 
the oval window (L. fenestra vestibuli), an oval opening on 
the labyrinthine wall of the tympanic cavity leading to the 
vestibule of the bony labyrinth (Figs. 7.113B and 7.116A). 
These ossicles are the ﬁ
 rst bones to be fully ossiﬁ
 ed during 
development and are essentially mature at birth. The bone 
from which they are formed is exceptionally dense (hard). 
(B) Oblique section of petrous temporal bone
Endolymphatic sac
Vestibular aqueduct containing
endolymphatic duct
Cochlear aqueduct
Duct of cochlea
Round window 
Vestibule of bony labyrinth
Tympanic cavity
Tympanic membrane
External acoustic 
meatus
Temporal bone
Malleus
Incus
Stapes
Base of stapes in 
oval window
Dura mater
Semicircular duct 
and canal
Pharyngotympanic tube
Tympanic cavity
Membranous labyrinth
Bony labyrinth
FIGURE 7.113. (Continued) B. The middle and internal parts of the ear are shown. The middle ear lies between the tympanic membrane and the internal 
ear. Three auditory ossicles stretch from the lateral to the medial wall of the tympanic cavity. The pharyngotympanic tube is a communication between the 
anterior wall of the tympanic cavity and the lateral wall of the nasopharynx. The internal ear is composed of a closed system of membranous tubes and 
bulbs, the membranous labyrinth, which is ﬁ
 lled with a ﬂ
 uid called endolymph (orange) and bathed in surrounding ﬂ
 uid called perilymph (purple).
