# Page 1056

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1026
Greater horn
of hyoid bone
(C) Posterosuperior view, looking antero-inferiorly
      through laryngeal vestibule and rima glottidis
Vestibular fold
Rima glottidis
Corniculate tubercle
Cuneiform tubercle
Piriform recess of
laryngopharynx
Ary-epiglottic fold
Vocal fold (cord)
Epiglottic tubercle
Epiglottis
Laryngeal ventricle
Saccule
Vestibular fold
(A) Posterior view of coronally-
      sectioned larynx
Trachea (T)
Cricoid cartilage (C)
Infra-glottic cavity (IC)
Vocal ligaments
(opposed)
Conus elasticus
Laryngeal ventricle
Thyroid cartilage
Ary-epiglottic fold
Laryngeal vestibule (V)
Middle part of laryngeal
cavity
Piriform fossa (recess – P)
(B) Coronal MRI study (Plane indicated in Fig. 8.41A & B)
Epiglottis (E)
E
C
E
C
V
T
P
P
IC
IC
V
T
P
P
IC
Tongue
Mandible
Epiglottic
vallecula
8
8
11
11
10
10
9
1
8
4
2
2
4
8
4
4
11
11
10
10
9
1
3
8
8
6
6
5
7
7
5
6
12
12
6
5
5
6
6
5
11
7
7
10
9
1
5
6
8
4
2
2
4
12
8
6
5
4
4
11
10
9
1
3
1
2
2
5
5
4
4
3
3
5
6
8
12
12
12
(D) Transverse MRI study of layrnx transecting
      thyroid cartilage
(E) Transverse MRI study of larynx transecting
      cricoid cartilage
1 Esophagus
2 Thyroid cartilage
3 Lamina of cricoid
   cartilage
4 Sternothyroid and
   sternohyoid muscles
5 Common carotid artery
6 IJV
7 Anterior root of spinal
   nerve
8 SCM
9 Inferior pharyngeal
   constrictor
10 Vertebral body
11 Spinal cord
12 Vertebral artery
1   Ary-epiglottic muscle
4   Vocalis
3   Thyro-arytenoid
5   Cricothyroid
2   Lateral crico-arytenoid
Key for (A):
FIGURE 8.35. Folds and compartments of larynx. A. This coronal section shows the compartments of the larynx: the vestibule, middle compartment 
with left and right ventricles, and the infraglottic cavity. B. This MRI study shows the epiglottic valleculae of the oropharynx, piriform fossae of the laryn-
gopharynx, and vestibular and vocal folds of the larynx. C. The rima glottidis (the space between the vocal folds) is visible through the laryngeal inlet and 
vestibule. The laryngeal inlet is bounded (1) anteriorly by the free curved edge of the epiglottis; (2) posteriorly by the arytenoid cartilages, the corniculate 
cartilages that cap them, and the interarytenoid fold that unites them; and (3) on each side by the ary-epiglottic fold that contains the superior end of 
the cuneiform cartilage. D and E. The planes of these transverse studies, oriented in the same direction as part C, pass superior (D) and inferior (E) to the 
rima glottidis. (MRI studies courtesy of Dr. W. Kucharczyk, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.)
