# Page 1040

Chapter 8  •  Neck
1010
Surgical Dissection of Carotid 
Triangle
The carotid triangle provides an important surgical 
approach to the carotid system of arteries. It also pro-
vides access to the IJV, the vagus and hypoglossal 
nerves, and the cervical sympathetic trunk. Damage or com-
pression of the vagus and/or recurrent laryngeal nerves during 
surgical dissection of the carotid triangle may produce an altera-
tion in the voice because these nerves supply laryngeal muscles.
Carotid Occlusion and Endarterectomy
Atherosclerotic thickening of the intima of the inter-
nal carotid artery may obstruct blood ﬂ
 ow. Symptoms 
resulting from this obstruction depend on the degree 
of obstruction and the amount of collateral blood ﬂ
 ow to the 
brain and structures in the orbit from other arteries. A partial 
occlusion of the internal carotid may cause a transient ischemic 
attack (TIA), a sudden focal loss of neurological function (e.g., 
dizziness and disorientation) that disappears within 24 hr. 
Arterial occlusion may also cause a minor stroke, a loss of neu-
rological function such as weakness or sensory loss on one side 
of the body that exceeds 24 hr but disappears within 3 weeks.
Obstruction of blood ﬂ
 ow can be observed in a Doppler 
color study (Fig. B8.3A). A Doppler is a diagnostic instru-
ment that emits an ultrasonic beam and detects its reﬂ
 ection 
from moving ﬂ
 uid (blood) in a manner that distinguishes the 
ﬂ
 uid from the static surrounding tissue, providing informa-
tion about its pressure, velocity, and turbulence. Carotid 
occlusion, causing stenosis (narrowing) in otherwise healthy 
persons (Fig. B8.3B), can be relieved by opening the artery 
at its origin and stripping off the atherosclerotic plaque with 
the intima. This procedure is called carotid endarterectomy. 
After the operation, drugs that inhibit clot formation are 
administered until the endothelium has regrown. Because 
of the relations of the internal carotid artery, there is risk of 
cranial nerve injury during the procedure involving one or 
more of the following nerves: CN IX, CN X (or its branch, 
the superior laryngeal nerve), CN XI, or CN XII (Fig. 8.21).
Carotid Pulse
The carotid pulse (“neck pulse”) is easily felt by pal-
pating the common carotid artery in the side of the 
neck, where it lies in a groove between the trachea 
and the infrahyoid muscles (Fig. 8.15). It is usually easily pal-
pated just deep to the anterior border of the SCM at the level 
of the superior border of the thyroid cartilage. It is routinely 
checked during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). 
Absence of a carotid pulse indicates cardiac arrest.
Carotid Sinus Hypersensitivity
In people with carotid sinus hypersensitivity (excep-
tional responsiveness of the carotid sinuses in various 
types of vascular disease), external pressure on the 
carotid artery may cause slowing of the heart rate, a fall in 
blood pressure, and cardiac ischemia resulting in fainting (syn-
cope). In all forms of syncope, symptoms result from a sudden 
and critical decrease in cerebral perfusion (Hirsch et al, 2010). 
Consequently, this method of checking the pulse is not recom-
mended for people with cardiac or vascular disease. Alternate 
sites, such as the radial artery at the wrist, should be used to 
check pulse rate in people with carotid sinus hypersensitivity.
Role of Carotid Bodies
The carotid bodies are in an ideal position to moni-
tor the oxygen content of blood before it reaches the 
brain (Fig. 8.17). A decrease in Po2 (partial pressure 
of oxygen), as occurs at high altitudes or in pulmonary dis-
ease, activates the aortic and carotid chemoreceptors, increas-
ing alveolar ventilation. The carotid bodies also respond to 
increased carbon dioxide (CO2) tension or free hydrogen ions 
in the blood. The glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX, perhaps 
with involvement of the vagus nerve) conducts the informa-
tion centrally, resulting in reﬂ
 exive stimulation of the respira-
tory centers of the brain that increase the depth and rate of 
breathing. The pulse rate and blood pressure also increase. 
With increased ventilation and circulation, more oxygen is 
taken in and the concentration of CO2 is reduced accordingly.
(A) Doppler color flow study of normal internal
      carotid artery
(B) Doppler color flow study of occluded carotid artery
FIGURE B8.3.
